# first primitive

## blockchain and crypto

blockchains allow to decentralize code execution and output agreement

- no one owns the code execution
- code runs as programmed
- code is transparently verifiable

blockchains are formed by a network of computers agreeing upon common state of data.

- **blockchain** protocol connecting machines
- machines are **nodes** that will run code as its written
- blockchain enforces rules

anyone should be able to participate in this process and no single computer connected to it controls this consensus process.

the problem of financial transaction bookkeeping can be tackled with modern technologies, but the problem of trusting an entity with honest and transparent financial bookkeeping is hard.

cypherpunks believed cryptography was a solution to trust but no implementation existed until bitcoin was created.

bitcoin combines cryptographic research and game theory to create a secure and scalable network.

### bitcoin components

- proof of work - security
- mining rewards - financial incentives
- public key cryptography - authentication
- linked data structure - chronology
- peer to peer network - permissionless

smart contract in solidity

```
// this data structure will keep track of which address has a balance

mapping(address => uint) balances;

function transfer(address to, uint amount) external {
  // subtract the amount from the sender's balance
  balances[msg.sender] -= amount;

  // add the amount to the recipient's balance
  balances[to] += amount;
}
```

- what makes this code a smart contract is that we compile it and deploy it to a decentralized virtual machine that executes bytecode (machine language)

### cryptographic hash functions

the most cryptographic primitive is the **cryptographic hash function**

when we deploy code in a decentralized execution environment (EVM)

primitives
- cryptographic hashes
- public key cryptography

**hash function**

given an input a fixed size output is returned

input can be any type of data of any size, and the output will always be the same size.

there's multiple algorithms for hash functions

**cryptographic hash function**

- deterministic
- pseudorandom
- one-way
- fast to compute
- collision resistant

**SHA256** provides a 256 bit output

in cryptographic functions, the output is representational of the given input. 

you don't know what the output will be given an input

the only way to reveal the input with a given output is to guess all possibilities. It requires brute computation until the 'puzzle' the function used to encrypt the input is solved.

SHA256 returns a 256 bit output so possible the possible number of combinations is `2**256`

blockchains save space by encrypting data regardless its size to a fixed sized output that can verify is an authentic representation of the input data.

## cryptographic hashes

use the **ethereum-crypto** library to create and compare SHA256 hashes.

**challenge**
- derived someone's favorite color from a given hash of the color.

### 1. brute force hashing

SHA256 hash function is a one-way function.

**one-way** 

- having the input, is easy to derived the output.
- having the output, is extremely unlikely to derive the input.

if you know the hashes of some of the inputs, then brutce-force guessing the output is possible or a **rainbow table** can be created to determine the input.

for security purposes, random **salt** can be added to the input to make it unguessable

**goal**
- given a hash, find the color input that would generate that hash.
- use `utf8ToBytes` to translate the string to bytes
- `sha256` hashes it
- `toHex` turns each hash from `uint8array` to a hexadecimal string

comparing two hashes
```js
const a = "apple";
const b = "banana";

const aBytes = utf8ToBytes(a);
const bBytes = utf8ToBytes(b);

const aHash = sha256(aBytes);
const bHash = sha256(bBytes);

console.log(toHex(aHash) === toHex(aHash)); // true
console.log(toHex(aHash) === toHex(bHash)); // false
```

UTF-8 standard translates all possible keyboard characters into bytes.

agreed upon standard to ensure we are all getting the same bit values representing characters we want.

**rainbow table**

a table that maps common inputs to their hash output

if a database is compromised and the company that stores passwords in a database doesn't protect their password hash with salt, it might be relatively easy for a hacker to use a rainbow table to find the passwords stored.

```js
// given a hash, return the color that created the hash
function findColor(hash) {
  return COLORS.find(elem => toHex(sha256(utf8ToBytes(elem))) === toHex(hash));
}
```
