# digital signatures

## public key cryptography

### symmetric key 
- same key in both sides
- communicate securely over an unsecured channel
- used in history in the military

**ceasar's cipher**

encrypts a message using a key. The key tells how many letters to shift over to reveal the encrypted message.

- key 324
- message cat
- encrypted fcx

move 3 letters away from c => f
move 2 leters away from a => c
move 3 letters away from t => x

the inverse can be applied to decrypt the message.

**AES advanced encryption standard**

used to secure communication across the web.

downside of symmetric key cryptography is that both sides must have the key beforehand.

### asymmetric key (public key) cryptography

- whit diffie inspired the concept
- a key is split (private and public)
- authenticatation (one key to sign (private), the other verifies (public) the message came from the signer without revealing the signer key)
- one key encrypts the other decrypts
- researched cryptographic hash functions

**public key encryption**
- B provides public key
- B secures private key
- C encrypts a message only B can read with B private key
- E can't read this message as only B can decrypt it

**public key authentication**
- B provides public key
- B secures private key
- B signs a message with private key and provides it to the network
- anyone in the network can verify that message indeed came from C

**public key cryptography in web3**
- user signs tx with private key
- user broadcasts tx to the blockchain
- blockchain nodes recover public key from signature which the user's address is derived from.

### cryptography historically

until the 70's cryptography was the study of encrypting messages. 

sender takes a message, passes it through a function to create encrypted output. 

as cryptography advanced, cryptographic functions became more complex and secure thanks to **secret keys**.

### personal computing

with personal computers, cryptographers started to think radically different. If people want to communicate securely with one another they would need to physically meet to exchange symmetric keys in order to from then on, communicate securely until 1976 Whitfield Diffie proposed asymmetric concepts like public and private key.

if someone encrypts a message with a private key, and reveals its public key, the message can be decrypted using the public key to reveal that indeed the message came from the private key (signer).

if someone encrypts a message with a public key, then it can only be decrypted by the private key. This way ensures that a message can be sent through any network and rest assured that no one could decrypt the message except the private key holder.

### RSA ECDSA

popular algorithms used for public key cryptography.

**RSA** easy to find the product of two prime numbers, yet extremely difficult to factor out those two prime numbers if you have the product

it's assumed RSA algorithm can only decrypt in exponential time (relative to the size of the input) so that's why a brute-force attack of randomly guessing the key is the common solution.

**ECDSA** algorithm uses elliptic curves. Provides the same level security as other algorithms with smaller key sizes. Digital signing algorithm used by bitcoin, specifically `secp256k1`

## public key excercises

**goals**
- sign a hashed message
- recover public key from the signature
- transform public key into the user's eth address
- understand how blockchain protocol works 
- use digital signature authentication tools

### 1. hashing messages

ECDSA process
- hash the message before applying the signature algorithm.
- after hashing the message, we can sign it with a private key. When you broadcast a tx on ethereum, you also sign a hashed representation of the tx before sending it to a node.

```js
// turn this into an array of bytes, the expected format for the hash algorithm
const bytes = utf8ToBytes("Vote Yes on Proposal 327");
// hash the message using keccak256
const hash = keccak256(bytes); 

console.log(toHex(hash)); // 928c3f25193b338b89d5646bebbfa2436c5daa1d189f9c565079dcae379a43be
```

- take the UTF-8 string message turn it into an array of bytes with `utf8ToBytes`
- return the `keccak256` hash of those bytes

```js
const { keccak256 } = require("ethereum-cryptography/keccak");
const { utf8ToBytes } = require("ethereum-cryptography/utils");

function hashMessage(message) {
    return keccak256(utf8ToBytes(message));
}
```

### 2. sign message

signing a message with `secp256k1` can return the signature along with a **recovery bit**.

the recovery bit helps us recover the public key from the signature. This allows the node to take the signature of a tx and understand which address authenticated that given tx.

a blockchain tx not only indicates the intent of the signer, it also authenticates the signer through public key cryptography.

**goals**
- sign a message hash using `sign` method

`sign` method takes a hash along with a constant `PRIVATE_KEY` as a second argument. Third optional argument is `options`, used to return the recovered bit so that the public key can be recovered from the signature.

the private key is used for the authentication process so it should be hidden as an environmental variable and added to .gitignore to not make it available in public repositories. 

ethereum-cryptography library uses `noble-secp256k1` 

### 3. recover key

the public key can be recovered so blockchain nodes can understand who signed the incoming tx.

> signature signs the hash of a message, this signature is enough to authenticate the message.

**goals**
- find the public key of a message signer
- hash the message when passed as an argument

```js
async function recoverKey(message, signature, recoveryBit) {
  return secp.recoverPublicKey(hashMessage(message), signature, recoveryBit);
}
```

### 4. public key to address

both bitcoin and ethereum have a transformation process to take a public key and transform it into an address

bitcoin includes a checksum and base58 encoding.

ethereum address transformation is simpler, the address is the last 20 bytes of the hash of the public key.

address is then different from the public key, but youcan always derive the address with the public key.

**goal**
- take the first byte off the public key
- the first byte indicates the format of the key (if it's compressed or not)
- `publicKey` parameter will be a `Uint8Array` so `slice` method can be used to slice the first byte.
- take the `keccak` hash of the rest of the public key.
- take the last 20 bytes of the keccak hash and return it

```js
const secp = require("ethereum-cryptography/secp256k1");
const { keccak256 } = require("ethereum-cryptography/keccak");

function getAddress(publicKey) {
    // the first byte indicates whether this is in compressed form or not
    return keccak256(publicKey.slice(1)).slice(-20);
}
```

## supplemental resources on digital signatures

### ECDSA 

[cloudflare](https://blog.cloudflare.com/ecdsa-the-digital-signature-algorithm-of-a-better-internet/)

[wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elliptic_Curve_Digital_Signature_Algorithm)

[more on ECDSA](https://cryptobook.nakov.com/digital-signatures/ecdsa-sign-verify-messages)

### bitcoin

[secp256k1](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Secp256k1)
[bitcoin addresses](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Address)
[address derivation](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Technical_background_of_version_1_Bitcoin_addresses#:~:text=A%20Bitcoin%20address%20is%20a,that%20the%20signature%20is%20valid.)

bitcoin chose base 58 for addresses as this format removes commonly mistaken characters like 0 and upper case O.

### diffie-hellman key exchange

whit diffie and marting hellman discovered public key concept.

[diffie hellman exchange](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffie%E2%80%93Hellman_key_exchange)

diffie hellman exchange is critical to TLS handshake for HTTPS

diffie hellman key exchange is utilized in a hybrid cryptosystem since it uses assymetric cryptography for the handshake and symmetric for the message passing

[more on diffie hellman exchange](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NmM9HA2MQGI)

[more](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yjrfm_oRO0w)

[elliptic curves](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NF1pwjL9-DE)

### RSA

- [wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RSA_(cryptosystem))
- [cryptobook](https://cryptobook.nakov.com/digital-signatures/rsa-signatures)
- [eddie woo pt 1 RSA math](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4zahvcJ9glg)
- [eddie woo pt 2 RSA math](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oOcTVTpUsPQ)
- [RSA backdoor](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-security-nsa-rsa/exclusive-nsa-infiltrated-rsa-security-more-deeply-than-thought-study-idUSBREA2U0TY20140331)