# proof of work and mining

## mining

mining is the process of creating a block of tx to be added to a proof-of-work blockchain.

mining is the process of extending a chain by creating blocks.

peers in the mining process is any of the node that contain mining software processes.

mining is an automated software that people run.

mining enforces consensus rules on a blockchain network.

- no double-spending
- block size
- validate txs

mining handles currency issuance on a blockchain system.

## proof of work

proves other miners in the network that they performed work.

proof of work is the solution to the mining process puzzle.

a mining software hashes new data to add to the blockchain, until a certain hash output is found matching an algorithm difficulty

consensus mechanism that allows to come to agreement on data state.

**mining algorithm**

1. take current's block header
2. append a nonce, starting at nonce 0
3. hash data from 1 and 2
4. check hash versus target (provided by protocol)
5. if hash < target difficulty, puzzle is solved
6. else, restart process but increment nonce

blockchain networks are distributed and decentralized databases.

in a decentralized environment
- all nodes have to agree in the current and future state of data stored in the ledger
- who gets to add blocks / tx to the chain and how they are valid blocks

valid proof of work in the bitcoin network

`000000000000000000043f43161dc56a08ffd0727df1516c987f7b187f5194c6`

the task of the miner
- take an input (previous block header + new txs to add) and hash it
- if the hash output is below a target difficulty then the miner has found the answer to the puzzle 
- 19 leading zeros means having 1/16 character posibilities per space (0).
- the range of each possible character per space is in hexadecimal.
- the outputs for SHA-256 are in hexadecimal
- finding one 32-byte SHA-256 output with only one leading zero will take on average 16 tries.

proof of work networks have `target_difficulty`.

in order to add a new block, they must find a proof of work lower than the network target difficulty.


**consensus mechanisms**

at least 51% of nodes are in agreement over the current global state of the network.

rules that a network follows in order to stay in agreement over what is valid data

- you can't double spend
- the longest chain will be the one that the rest of nodes accept as true, determined by a chain's cumulative work *nakamoto consensus*

## proof of work miner

will receive tx from a network and add them to its mempool

when a block is ready to be mined, the miner will take tx from the mempool and include them into the mined block.

the miner will calculate basic proof of work below a constant `TARGET_DIFFICULTY`

### 1. mempool

users broadcast tx to a network.

the mempool is a place for miners to keep txs before adding them to a block.

miners will take all txs with highest tx fees from mempool.

they'll add them to the block and attempt to find proof of work.

**goal**

- implement `addTransaction` function to add transactions to the mempool
- take tx sent to the function and push it on top of the `mempool` array

```js
const SHA256 = require('crypto-js/sha256');
const TARGET_DIFFICULTY = BigInt(0x0fffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff);
const MAX_TRANSACTIONS = 10;

const mempool = [];
const blocks = [];

function addTransaction(transaction) {
  // TODO: add transaction to mempool
  mempool.push(transaction);
}
```

### 2. mine block

blocks contain
- software version
- timestamp
- merkle root of transactions
- previous block hash
- difficulty

**goal**

- update `mine()` to create a new block with a unique identifier and add it to `blocks` array
- block `id` will be equal to the block height prior to the new block being added
- push block into `blocks` array

```js
const SHA256 = require('crypto-js/sha256');
const TARGET_DIFFICULTY = BigInt(0x0fffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff);
const MAX_TRANSACTIONS = 10;

const mempool = [];
const blocks = [];

function addTransaction(transaction) {
  // TODO: add transaction to mempool
    mempool.push(transaction);
}

function mine() {
  // TODO: mine a block
  const block = {id: blocks.length}

  blocks.push(block);
}
```

### 3. block hash

all the information in the header of a block is hashed together to create a unique hash based on those properties.

if anything changes in the header, it will affect the hash.

every block contains of the hash before it, so any change will also affect every future block as well.

**goal**

- stringify block object `JSON.stringify`
- take `SHA256` of the stringified block object
- set resulting value to a `hash` property on the mined block before mining it

```js
const SHA256 = require('crypto-js/sha256');
const TARGET_DIFFICULTY = BigInt(0x0fffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff);
const MAX_TRANSACTIONS = 10;

const mempool = [];
const blocks = [];

function addTransaction(transaction) {
    // TODO: add transaction to mempool
    mempool.push(transaction);
}

function mine() {
    // TODO: mine a block
    const block = {id: blocks.length}
    const hash = SHA256(JSON.stringify(block));
    
    blocks.push({...block, hash});
}
```

### 4. mine TX

**block size**

a block size limit can't be exceeded.

number of txs that fit inside a block varies due to txs having different sizes.

`MAX_TRANSACTIONS` is a constant in the excercise

**goal**

- inside `mine()` pull transactions off the mempool and include them in the block called `transactions`
- remove each tx from the mempool that is included in a block
- add `transactions` array to the block before hashing the block

```js
const SHA256 = require('crypto-js/sha256');
const TARGET_DIFFICULTY = BigInt(0x0fffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffffff);
const MAX_TRANSACTIONS = 10;

const mempool = [];
const blocks = [];

function addTransaction(transaction) {
    // TODO: add transaction to mempool
    mempool.push(transaction);
}

function mine() {
    // TODO: mine a block
    let transactions = [];

    while (transactions.length < MAX_TRANSACTIONS && mempool.length > 0) {
      transactions.push(mempool.pop());
    }  
    const block = {id: blocks.length, transactions}

    const hash = SHA256(JSON.stringify(block));
    
    blocks.push({...block, hash});
}
```

### 5. difficulty

the difficulty is adjusted every 2016 blocks, every two weeks and the blocks are mined on average every 10 minutes.

the difficulty is adjusted to attempt to keep the mining intervals around 10 minutes per block mark

**goal**

- `mine()` function should have a `nonce` property.
- nonce should start at 0.
- keep changing the nonce until a hash is found less than `TARGET_DIFFICULTY`

```js
// convert from a hash to BigInt
const hash = SHA256("example");
const int = BigInt(`0x${hash}`);

function mine() {
    // TODO: mine a block
    let transactions = [];

    while (transactions.length < MAX_TRANSACTIONS && mempool.length > 0) {
        transactions.push(mempool.pop());
    }

    const block = {id: blocks.length, transactions}

    block.nonce = 0;

    let hash;

    while (true) {
      hash = SHA256(JSON.stringify(block)).toString();

      if(BigInt(`0x${hash}`) < TARGET_DIFFICULTY) {
        break;
      }
      block.nonce++;
    }
    
    blocks.push({...block, hash});
}
```

## hashing and proof of work

proof of work is a solution to a computationally expensive challenge for computers.

program a computer to search for a hash starting with three 5's

```js
sha256("0"); // 5feceb…
sha256("1"); // 6b86b2…
sha256("2"); // d4735e…
// keep on guessing, keep on guessing…
sha256("5118"); // 555850…
```

this task gets exponentially harder the more 5s we require the output hash to start with.

this is what controls the difficulty of proof-of-work

bitcoin controls this by defining a target hash that the new block must be equal or lower to

proof-of-work prevents spamming.

it becomes computationally expensive to spam

the number to append to a block and figure out the mining puzzle is the nonce.

proof-of-work is the security system of bitcoin.

nodes are working to find hashes of data.

machines are financially incentive to mine the hashes and be compensated with BTC.

you would need to come up with 51% of computing power of a network to manipulate the data state of a blockchain

## additional resources

[hashchash](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Hashcash) was created by adam beck to combat email spamming.
[reusable proofs of work](https://nakamotoinstitute.org/finney/rpow/index.html) invented by hal finney using the hashcash concept
[b-money](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/B-money) invented by wei dai also using hashcash concept.

bitcoin uses mining to create a decentralized settlement layer of data.

[bitcoin's target difficulty](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Target). the more machines enter the network, the hash power increases, the difficulty increases as well and viceversa.

