# blockchain structure

## blockchain network architecture

**centralized**
computers send requests to a centralized server that stores the master copy of data

**decentralized**
a blockchain agrees on data state using a decentralized consensus mechanism

**distributed**
a blockchain network resembles a distributed architecture

**byzantine generals problem**

how do nodes coordinate in a decentralized environment.

data from a block is completely hashed

- prevHash - previous block hash
- data - transactions
- timestamp - to record time
- nonce - # to be hashed until a valid hash is found

a valid hash 
- block index is one greater than latest block index
- block previous hash equals to latest block hash
- block hash meets difficulty requirements
- block hash is correctly calculated

### blockchain architecture

the term node means a unit or member of a data structure.

a node can be thought of as a computer.

data structures like a blockchain (distributed database) use nodes to update data their data

there is no central supernode responsible to verify the changes to the data state. All nodes are equal members of the network.

a blockchain is a collection of distributed nodes arranged as a peer-to-peer network

**genesis block** the first block in a blockchain. should have index of 0

**index** is the position of the block in the chain

**timestamp** a record of when the block was created. UNIX timestamp, the number of seconds since Ja 1st, 1970.

the timestamp is what establishes a blockchain as a chronological time-based structure.

a hashing function takes data as input and returns a unique hash.

a hash is a digital fingerprint of the entire block

the **data** is combination of data (index, timestamp, prevHash, block data and nonce)

```
f ( index + previous hash + timestamp + data + nonce ) = hash

f ( 0 + "0" + 1508270000000 + "Welcome to Blockchain Demo 2.0!" + 604 ) = 000dc75a315c77a1f9c98fb6247d03dd18ac52632d7dc6a9920261d8109b37cf
```

**previous hash** hash of previous block

**data** each block can store data (transactions)

**nonce** the nonce is the number used to find a valid hash

**difficulty** number of leading zeros required for a hash to be valid

a miner starts a **candidate block** with a nonce of 0 and increments the nonce to 1 until finding a valid hash

how does data maintains integrity?

how do we make sure the state of data is never corrupted?

how difficult it is to manipulate data in a block that has many blocks mined on top of it?

manipulating a block deeply nested in the chain would be computational intensive and does not guarantee being able to manipulate it. There's a bigger financial incentive in mining and participate in the consensus mechanism than try to attack it.

if the genesis block hash is

`000000000019d6689c085ae165831e934ff763ae46a2a6c172b3f1b60a8ce26f`

and an attacker (mallory) manipulates the genesis block hash a new one is produced

`eb3e5df5eefceb8950e4a444507ce7df1cc534f54a5113f2792ab64830392db0`

the attacker now needs to hash the manipulated data to meet valid requirements.

once a valid hash is found, the attacker must repeat this process for every block to successfully attack the chain

**adding a new block**

new block has to meet requirements
- block index greater than latest block index by 1
- block previous hash equals latest block hash
- block hash meets difficulty requirement
- block hash is correctly calculated

**peer-to-peer**

every participant performs validation for every single block proposed.

when one node proposes a new block, every peer will verify it to make sure it meets consensus requirements, then the peer adds the block to their ledger and will have their own version of a "true" chain. So will others that meet the consensus rules.

### 1. blocks and hashes

each block contains 
- tranactional data
- metadata describing the block
- a link to the previous block before it

these components are given to a hash function as arguments to create a unique sequence of bits to represent the block components unique combination.

**goal**

- a `Block` class, using `SHA256` return the valid hash in the `toHash` function.

**hash function**

is used to take input data of any size and output a unique series of bits of a defined size representing the original data

a cryptographic hash function can return a consistent yet seemingly random output.

the output should be consistent so we can rely on putting the same input, and getting the same output

randomness should be strong so it's impossible to re-construct the input from the output.

`SHA256` will take an arbitrary input and return a consistent output

```js
const hash = SHA256("Dan");
console.log( hash.toString() ); // b12595…1cbe7e
```
the hash is a 256 bit sequence.

a hexadecimal character requires 4 bits so there are 64 hexadecimal characters in a SHA256 hash.

lower-casing one character is enough to completely change the output
```js
const hash = SHA256("dan");
console.log( hash.toString() ); // ec4f2d…56f1cb
```

**crypto-js**

`SHA256` algorithm desined by NSA

takes as tring as argument, regardless of size and hashes it to a 256 bit array

calling `toString()` on that array gives us a 64 character hexadecimal string

`0x` prefix means hexadecimal notation is being used

the regex in the test file `/^[0-9A-F]{64}$/i` tests the output is 64 hexadecimal characters.

a bit can represent two values 0 and 1

two bits represent 4 values 00 01 10 11

4 bits can represent 16 values 0000 to 1111

we can map these values to a character in the hexadecimal alphabet. 

SHA256 outputs 256 bits, divided by the number of bits to represent a hexadecimal character (4) we get 64 hexadecimal characters

```js
const SHA256 = require('crypto-js/sha256');

class Block {
    toHash(string) {
        const hash = SHA256(string);
        return hash.toString();// a hash!
    }
}
```

### 2. what's in a hash?

**adding data to the hash**

adding data to the block ensures the block hash contains it

creating a new block, data is passed to its constructor

**goal**

- add `data` property to a `Block`
- when a `Block` is created with new, the constructor takes that `data` to set in the property
- use data to calculate block hash

```js
const SHA256 = require('crypto-js/sha256');

class Block {
  constructor(data) {
    this.data = data;
  }
  toHash() {
    return SHA256(this.data);// a hash!
  }
}

const block = new Block("Alice sent Bob 1 BTC");

console.log( block.data ); // Alice sent Bob 1 BTC
```

### 3. genesis block

adding the first block to the blockchain class

**goal**

- `Blockchain` class has a `chain` array.
- create a `new Block` in the `Blockchain` constructor and add it to the chain array

```js
const Block = require('./Block');

class Blockchain {
  constructor() {
    this.chain = [ new Block() ];
  }
}
```

### 4. adding blocks

- `addBlock` should take in a new block and add it to the chain array

```js
const blockchain = new Blockchain();
const block = new Block("Charlie sent Dave 2 BTC");

blockchain.addBlock(block);

console.log(blockchain.chain.length); // 2
```

### 5. linking blocks

**previous hash**

the hash of the previous block has to be included in the next block.

**chaining data**

the block data changes the hash generated to represent the block

multiple nodes are continuously working to compute a single block, while an attacker would have to compute multiple blocks to actually mutate the data state.

**goal**

- add `previousHash` prop to each block
- use `previousHash` while calculating the block's hash
- `addBlock` could add `previousHash` property
- `this.previousHash` property should be added in the `toHash` as well
- concatenate input arguments with + operator

```js
class Block {
  constructor(data) {
    this.data = data;
      
  }
  toHash() {
    return SHA256(this.data + this.previousHash);
  }
}

class Blockchain {
  constructor() {
    this.chain = [ new Block() ];
  }
  addBlock(block) {
    block.previousHash = this.chain[this.chain.length - 1].toHash();
    
    this.chain.push(block);
  }
}

const hash = SHA256("dog" + "cat"); // hash of dog and cat together
```

### 6. validating the chain

**chain validation**

when a node finds a new block, it broadcasts the new version of the blockchain to the peers.

there might be multiple vertsions of the blockchain, but the longest valid blockchain is accepted as the source of truth.

**blockchain consensus**

all nodes in the network operate on an agreed upon data state.

a rule in the consensus mechanism of proof of work is that the longest chain wins.

the version of the blockchain with the most computational resources behind it is the source of truth.

the point of making the creation of a new block difficult is to design security behind a trustless network.

an attacker would waste lots of resources attempting to mutate data state.

a block has to satisfy the blockchain protocol rules to fit into a blockchain

rules
- block must include metadata
- transactional data
- previous hash of the block before it
- the block hash must contain a certain number of zeroes.

the only way to figure out these requirements is using a random value (nonce).

the node must keep guessing until it finds a block that meets these requirements

once a block is found, the computer broadcasts the block to the network and is rewarded financially

**goals**

- `isValid` function on `Blockchain` class returns true or false
- `isValid` should check the integrity of every block in its chain by looking at each block's `previousHash` making sure it's equal to the block before it.

compare SHA256 output
```js
const hash1 = SHA256("a");
const hash2 = SHA256("a");

console.log(hash1 === hash2); // false
console.log(hash1.toString() === hash2.toString()); // true
```

the returned value of SHA256 is an object, objects are compared by reference so `toString` is needed to compare hashes

```js

class Blockchain {
  constructor() {
    this.chain = [ new Block() ];
  }
  addBlock(block) {
    block.previousHash = this.chain[this.chain.length - 1].toHash();
    
    this.chain.push(block);
  }
  isValid() {
    for (let i = this.chain.length - 1; i > 0; i--) {
      const block = this.chain[i];
      const prev = this.chain[i - 1];
      if (block.previousHash.toString() !== prev.toHash().toString()) {
        return false;
      }
    }
    return true;
  }
}
```

## further reading on bitcoin

**51% attack**

refers to a point where a group of miners have control of more than 50% of the network and acts maliviously.

to change a block that has been confirmed many times, the attacking blockchain would need to mine new blocks before the existing blockchain mines 1 requiring more than 51% of power to perform this.

an attacker could be building up a chain for a longer period of time but the more they do this, the more expensive the attack becomes further discouraging this behavior.

double-spends can occur during a blockchain fork

[bitcoin genesis block](https://blockchain.info/block/000000000019d6689c085ae165831e934ff763ae46a2a6c172b3f1b60a8ce26f)

the block `nonce` is actually a 32-bit field `2 ** 32` is `4,294,967,296` so that's the max size of a nonce.

**software version** tracks bitcoin software upgrades

**previous block hash** hash of the previous block

**merkle root** its a hash that represents all the transactions

**timestamp** approximate time 

**target** difficulty target defining how small the POW must be

