# building a server

## running a node server

a server is a computer that provides data to other computers.

visiting an URL is sending a request to a server that you want certain data held in the URL. 

the website responds with an HTML page the browser can parse and display to the final user.

using the built-in `http` module in node.js

```js
// index.js
const http = require('http');

const server = http.createServer(function(request, response) {
  response.statusCode = 200;
  response.setHeader('Content-Type', 'text/plain');
  response.end('Hello World');
});

server.listen({ port: 3000, host: 'localhost' }, function() {
  console.log('Server is running!');
});

```

- run `node index` to start the server
- http://localhost:3000/ can be opened in the browser
- the server responds with `hello world`.
- the server will run and await new requests. 
- `CTRL + C` will kill the terminal
- `nodemon` can restart the server automatically after changes to the code

### creating the server

```js
const server = http.createServer(function(request, response) {
  response.statusCode = 200;
  response.setHeader('Content-Type', 'text/plain');
  response.end('Hello World');
});
```

- the `function` is executed anytime a new machine connects to our server.
- a machine connects to the server when it makes a **request**
- the **request** object contains information about the connecting machine, the data and action requested
- `console.log(request.headers)` will log what the servers receive of our client when we make a request.
- the **response** object is what the server sends back to the machine that made the request (the **client**).
- `response.setHeader('Content-Type', 'text/plain'); sets a header.
- **headers** define requests and responses.
- `Content-Type` tells the browser how to render the information coming back
- `response.end('Hello World');` `end` method indicates information is done being included in the response, the server can then respond to the client request.
- the **body** of the response is added. 
- while serving an HTML page, the body of the response will be the HTML page itself.

```js
// server listens to requests
server.listen({ port: 3000, host: 'localhost' }, function() {
  console.log('Server is running!');
});
```

- server is set to listen on port 3000 on **localhost**
- when the connection is ready, the callback is invoked executing `console.log`.
- **ports** allows to create connections to different processes on a machine.
- two node servers can be run on one machine simply by defining different ports to each.
- `EADDRINUSE` error thrown when listening to a port already in use.

**on protocols**

A protocol is a set of rules that govern the exchange of data between devices. It defines the standards and formats that must be used for communication to take place, as well as the actions that should be taken in specific situations. 

Protocols are used in many different areas of technology, including networking, data transmission, and software development. 

Some examples of protocols include HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol), which is used for transferring data over the web, and TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol), which is the main protocol used for communication on the internet. 

Other protocols include FTP (File Transfer Protocol) for transferring files between computers, and SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol) for sending and receiving email.

**on ports**

virtual points where network connections start and end.

software based and managed by the OS

each port is associated with a specific process or service (protocols).

emails go through a different port than websites.

ports are standarized across devices that support network connections with each port assigned to a number.

HTTP messages go through port 80

different type of data flow to and from a computer over the same network connection.

ports help machines understand where to send what kind of data that wants to come int or exit the machine.

[resources](https://www.cloudflare.com/learning/network-layer/what-is-a-computer-port/)

**OSI model**

- conceptual model of the internet infrastructure

**7. application layer**

human computer. applications can access network services

**6. presentation layer**

data is in a usuable format. data encryption occurs

**5. session layer**

manages connections, responsible for ports and sessions

**4. transport layer**

transmits data using transmission protocols including TCP and UDP.

ports are defined in this layer. only a protocol like TCP/UDP can define which port a packet should go to.

TCP/UDP headers have a section for indicating port numbers


**3. network layer**

decides the physical path the data will take

IP protocol

**2. datalink layer**

defines format of data

**1. physical layer**

transmits raw bit stream over a physical medium


a **firewall** can block or allow network traffic based on a set of security rules.

offices use a firewall to protect their network from online treats

attackers try to send malicious traffic to random ports. if the ports are open, they can receive traffic. that makes the machine vulnerable to these random packages sent by an attacker.

there isn't a reason for ports to be open unless needed.

attackers use RDP protocol to exploit vulnerabilities attacking through port 3389


## HTML node server

web servers serve HTML pages

```js
// html server
// index.js
const http = require('http');

const HTML = `
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <meta charset="utf-8">
    <title>My Hello World</title>
    <style>
      body {
        background-color: black;
        color: yellow;
        text-align: center;
        font-size: 40px;
      }
    </style>
  </head>
  <body>
    Hello World
  </body>
</html>
`;

const server = http.createServer((request, response) => {
  response.statusCode = 200;
  response.setHeader('Content-Type', 'text/html');
  response.end(HTML);
});

server.listen({ port: 3000, host: 'localhost' }, () => {
  console.log('Up and Running!');
});
```

run `node index`

### serving an HTML file

store HTML in an `.html` file

modify server

```js
const http = require('http');
// add the fs library for reading from the file system
const fs = require('fs');

const server = http.createServer((request, response) => {
  // we'll attempt to read from the index.html file
  fs.readFile('index.html', function(err, content) {
    if(err) {
        // readFile will return an error if it was unable to successfully read the content
        // if this happens, let's return an error response back from the server
        response.statusCode = 500;
        response.end("Could not serve index.html");
    }
    else {
        // if there is no error, we'll serve the HTML we read from the file!
        response.statusCode = 200;
        response.setHeader('Content-Type', 'text/html');
        response.end(content);
    }
  });
});
```

`fs` built-in node.js module can read/write on the filesystem of the machine.

`fs.readFile` will attempt to read from `index.html`.

if an error is returned, then the `statusCode` of the request is updated to an http error code (500 e.g) and we return that the file couldn't not be served with `.end`.

if the file is read, the content is returned, `statusCode` changes to a successful code (200) and we return the contents.

### serving a CSS file

```html
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css">
```

```js
const server = http.createServer((request, response) => {
  // by default we'll serve index.html
  let filename = "index.html";
  let contentType = "text/html";
  // if the client is requesting style.css, we'll serve it instead
  if(request.url === "/style.css") {
    filename = "style.css";
    contentType = "text/css";
  }
  fs.readFile(filename, function(err, content) {
    if(err) {
        response.statusCode = 500;
        response.end(`Could not serve ${filename}`);
    }
    else {
        response.statusCode = 200;
        response.setHeader('Content-Type', contentType);
        response.end(content);
    }
  });
});
```

node.js frameworks like **express** can
- help us serve static assets and create routes for data requests
- recognizes extensions and changes `contentType` accordingly
- should handle requests to create, retrieve, update and delete data

