# **introduction**

## <center>**language to add interactivity to websites**</center>

programs are called scripts.

**executed on**: 
- the browser
- the server
- any device with a javascript engine

browser embedded engine is called the javascript virtual machine.

**different engines different names**:
- v8 (google chrome, opera, edge)
- SpiderMonkey (firefox)
- chakra (IE)
- squirrelfish (safari)
- others (javascriptcore, nitro, etc)

**engines**
- engine reads (parses) the script
- converts(compiles) the script to machine code
- machine code runs fast

javascript doesn't provide low-level access to: 
- system memory
- the CPU

Node.js a javascript environment allows low-level access to:
- read/write
- network requests

## <center>**javascript in the browser**</center>

doesn't access to files, except if the user drops them in the window or selects them via input tag

different tabs don't know about each other. 

**<dt>same origin policy</dt>**
<dd>security mechanism that restricts how a script or document loaded by one origin can interact with a resource from another origin.</dd><br>

resources must come from the same site, domain, protocol, port, etc. Javascript can communicate over the network to a server origin of the current page. it requires explicit agreement (in HTTP headers) from the remote site to receive data.

such limitations only exist in the browser.

**Unique features**  
- fully integrated with HTML/CSS  
- supported by browsers enabled by default  

**transpiling**
<dd>converting a language to another language before compiling</dd><br>

## <center>**languages that build over javascript (supersets)**</center>

**coffeeScript**
        
    shorter javascript syntax
**TypeScript** 

    strict data typing
**Flow**
    
    strict data typing 
**Dart**

    standalone with own engine
    runs on non-browser environments
**Brython**
      
    python transpiler to javascript
**kotlin**

    can target the browser or node
**elm**

    purely FP
    compiles to js, html and css


[ECMA-262 specification](https://www.ecma-international.org/publications-and-standards/standards/ecma-262/)

**<dt>IDEs</dt>**
<dd>chrome and firefox are usually the leaders in developing developer tools</dd><br>









