# **Code Quality**

## **<center>DEBUGGING IN BROWSER</center>**
    
### **debugging**

process of finding and fixing errors.  
it allows to trace the code step by step.

broswer support debugging tools (developer tools)

### **chrome developer tools**

### **source**

***file navigator***  
lists files attached to the page.  
chrome extensions appear here.  
***code editor***  
shows the source code.  
***debugging***  
page for debugging.
        
### **console**

can execute statements
        
### **breakpoints**

a point of code where the debugger will pause execution

while code is paused, we can examine the state of the script, current variables, and understand what the program did until that breakpoint.

***conditional breakpoint***   
right click on line number.
triggers when a given expression is truthy.
            
***debugger***
the command debugger; can be added in the code to pause execution at that moment.
            
only works when the developer tools are open.

***informational dropdowns***  
allow to examine the current state of the code.

***watch***  
shows current values of an expression.  
+ inputs an expression .

***call stack***  
nested calls chain.
                
***scope***  
defines local and global scopes.
                
### **tracing execution**

resume execution - `F8`

run next statement (step) - `F9`  

- goes in the nested function, pauses execution at first line

(step over) - `F10`
- executes nested function call, then its paused.

step into - `F11`
- behaves different in asynchronous function calls
- the step command ignores async actions
- step into goes into the async function and waits for them if necessary

step out - `SHIFT F11`
- continues execution
- stops last line of current function

enable/disable breakpoints

enable/disable automatic pause
- errors during execution automatically pauses it
        
### **logging**

with logging, we can check the state of variables and function calls by printing an output to console using the log() method

## **<center>CODING STYLE</center>**
code should always be 
- CLEAN
- EASY TO READ
    
### **best practices**
- ***no space***  
between function name and parentheses  
between parentheses and parameters
```js
function name(parameter) {/*code block*/};
``` 
- ***indentation***  
2 spaces not a tab
```js
function name(parameter) {
  console.log(parameter);
  /*2 spaces*/
    console.log(parameter);
    /*1 tab or 4 spaces*/
}
``` 
- ***space***
after for/if/while statements  
```js
for (let i = 0; i < some.length; i++); {
  console.log('looped');
};
/* space after statement */
let aVariable;
```
- ***empty line***  
between logical blocks
```js
for (let i = 0; i < some.length; i++); {
  /* block of code */
};
/* space */
if (true) {
  /* block of code */
}
```
- ***opening curly brace***  
on the same first line after a space
```js 
function name(parameter)/* */{ /* block of code */ };
```  
- ***spaces around operators***
```js
let var = ( 1 + 1 ) / 2;
```  
- ***semicolon at the end of an expression***
```js
const myFunc = () => {  
  /* code block */ 
};
```  
- ***space between arguments***
```js
function name(arg1, arg2, arg3) { /* block of code */ };
```  
- ***else statement without a line break after the closing curly brace of the if statement***  
```js
if (true) {
  /* block of code */
} else {
  /* block of code */ 
}
```
- ***spaces around a nested call*** 
```js
console.log( Math.random() );
``` 

    
### **curly braces**
- egyptian style  
- opening brace on the same line of keyword  
- space before the opening bracket  
- curly braces not needed for a single line constructs  
    
### **line length**
- split multi-line strings with backticks  
- split multi-line conditions     
- max line length 80 - 120 characters  

### **indents**
- ***horizontal***  
2 || 4 spaces || tab  
spaces are more common.

spaces allow aligning parameters with the opening parenthesis

- ***vertical***  
empty lines splitting code into logical blocks.  
no more than 9 lines of code without vertical indentation.  
  
### **semicolons**  
present after each statement   

the code is vulnerable to errors if js doesn't understand where the end of a statement is.

StandardJS
    
### **nesting levels**  
avoiding extra nesting with continue and break directives in loops.

conditional statements can be handled early on to avoid nesting and write the program in the main local scope.

### **function placement**  
declare above the code that uses the function.  
a function is declared when its first used.  
write code that uses the function first.

***best practice***  
if function is simple, clear and precise, by reading what it does, you might not need to know how it does it (by reading the declaration).
    
### **style guides**
achieves uniformity

***popular choices***
- google javascript style guide
- airbnb javascript style guide
- idiomaticjs
- standardjs
        
### **automated linters**
automatically check style of code and make improving suggestions

- jslint
- jshint
- eslint  
```cmd
npm install -g eslint  
```
create a .eslintrc config file in root of js project

***.eslintrc config file***     
extends: sets config based on default  
env: environmental variables
rules: actual style rule sets

## **<center>COMMENTS</center>**
```js
// single line
/* multi-line */
```

the code should be easy to understand without comments.  
functions should be self-descriptive.

***good comments***  
- describe the architecture  
high level overview of components, interaction, control flow

- document function parameters and usage

## **<center>NINJA CODE</center>**
- make code as short as possible  
ternary ? operator to replace if else statements.
avoid nesting if possible.
    
- use abbreviations  
list `lst`  
userAgent `ua`  
browser `brsr`  

- function prefixes  
display  
displayMessage
    
- reuse names  
add variables only when necessary
    
- side effects  
when functions perform calculations, they return data without changing anything but the data.

## **<center>AUTOMATED TESTING WITH MOCHA</center>**

when writing functions, we should know what parameters give what results.
    
### testing

checking a function by running it and comparing the outcome result with the expected result.

automating testing is when we write programs to test and compare results.

### behavior driven development BDD

test, documentation, examples.

***specification (spec)***  
description of what the function should do

```js
describe('title', function() {
  it('use case description', function() {
    assert.equal(function(arugment), expected   value);
  });
});
```
yields an error if the values aren't equal.
        
write failing tests, to then make an implementation to fix the errors.

### development flow

- spec is written with basic tests
- initial implementation is created
- testing frameworks (mocha, jest) run the spec
- errors are fixed 
- repeat these steps for new implementations

### Testing libraries

***mocha***  
core testing framework  
describe()  
it()  

***chai***  
library with assertions.  
assert.equal is used to compare expected and output values.  

***sinon***  
a library to spu over functions.
        
suitable testing libraries for both in-browser and server-side testing.

sometimes you can cheat the test when the return value is equal to expected value. 

testing more expected values should help refine the results

***grouping*** 

## **<center>POLYFILLS AND TRANSPILERS</center>**

javascript ***new proposals*** are appended to a [list](https://tc39.github.io/ecma262).

then after proposals are approved, they progress to the ***specification (Spec)***.

its common for the engine to implement only parts of the standard.

transpilers and polyfills are tools to make modern code work on older engines that don't understand new javascript features. 

### **transpiler** 

program (software) that translates source code to another source code.  

it can parse modern code and rewrite it using older syntax constructs.

js didn't have the nullish coalescing operator ?? before 2020.

***babel***  
most famous transpiler

***webpack***  
project build system

provides the ability to run a transpiler automatically.

### **polyfills**  

new language features may not only be new syntax constructs and operators, but also built-in function.

a polyfill is a script that can update or add functions to fill in the gaps and missing implementation of older versions of js.

***polyfill libraries***  
corejs  
polyfill.io  
            
























