# *OBJECTS*

javascript value types are 8
- 7 primitive (string, number, bigint, null, undefin- boolean, symbol)
- 1 special (objects)
    
objects can store keyed collections of data and complex entities

can be created with figure brackets `{ }`

**properties**  
a key:value pair where the key is a string (property name, identifier) and value can be any kind of value.

separated by commas,  
a comma after the last property is allowed (*trailing, hanging*)
    
**empty object creation**  

```js
// object literal syntax
let user = {};

// object constructor syntax
let user = new Object();

// we can then add, remove and read values from an object at any time
let object = {
  key: value;
  key: value;
};

// delete operator deletes an object property
delete object.property
```
- multi word property names are allowed with quote delimiters

### **dot notation**

used to access object properties

```js
object.value
```
        
- only accepts valid legal names  
- if the property names are known and simple, dot notation is preferred  

### **square brackets**

notation to access object properties that can work with any type of string.

```js
user["not legal name"]
```
    
allows to obtain the property name as the result of an expression.

- more powerful than dot notation
- used for complex programs
    
### **computed properties**

square brackets can be used in an object literal
        
a computed property means that the name should be taken from a variable

```js
let propName = 'c';

const rank = {
  a: 1,
  b: 2,
  [propName] : 3
};

console.log(rank.c); // 3
```
computed properties can be used for getters and setters

```js
let name = 'fullName';

class Person {
  constructor(firstName, lastName) {
    this.firstName = firstName;
    this.lastName = lastName;
  }
  get [name]() {
    return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`;
  }
}

let person = new Person('rafael', 'reyes');
```

### **property value shorthand**

properties can have the same name as variables

propertyName === variableName (parameterName)  
name: name,  
age: age,  

**shorthand**  
name,  
age,  

object properties don't have the restriction of language-reserved words (`for`, `let`, `return`, `function`, etc)

- property names can be strings or symbols

other types are automatically converted to string

0 becomes '0'
        
__proto__

can't be set to a non-object value
        
### **`in` operator**    
possible to access any property in a js object, even if it doesn't exist

reading a non-existing property returns undefined

test if the property exists  
`object.property === undefined`
        
in operator  
`'key' in object`   
'propertyName' || variableNameHoldingPropValue

comparing an objects property to undefined, works fine to test if the property exists, but if the property has undefined assign to it, is not a reliable test.

`null` is mostly used for unknown or empty values.
    
### **`for in` loop**  

iterates over all keys of an object

*syntax*  
```js
for (key in object) {/*block of code*/};
```
        
for constructs allows to declare looping variable inside the loop (let key in object).

### **order in objects**  

when looping in an object,   
objects are ordered in a special way

integer properties are sorted, others are sorted in creation order.

customizing the order of integer properties, can be done by converting it to a non integer

40 converts to '40' non integer converts to '+40'
        
### **summary**    

objects are associative arrays with special features  
they store properties (key value pairs)  
keys must be strings or symbols  
values can be any type  

properties are accessed via
- dot notation 
- square bracket notation  
allow taking the key from a variable
        
delete keyword is used to delete object  
check a property in an object with key in object  
iterate over an object for (let key in object) loop  

other object types are extensions of the object type

- array

- date

- error

- etc
        

## **OBJECT REFERENCES AND COPYING**
objects are stored and copied by reference.  
primitive values are copied as a whole value.

there will still be one object, and two references when copying an object.

accessing the object and modify its contents can be done through any of the references.

copying references of the same object is useful, you can write with one reference that has more privileges, and you can read with another reference without those privileges.


### **objects are converted to primitives**

when comparing objects with objects or with primitives

comparing an object to a primitive is rarely needed

an object declared as const *can* be modified  

the value of the const variable is constant,  
it must always be the same object,  
but properties of objects are free to change  

### **cloning and merging**  
duplicating an object is creating a new object, this replicates the structure of the existing one.
 
this is done by iterating over its properties and copying them on the primitive level.
    
**Object.assign method**  

***syntax***  
`Object.assign(dest, src1[, src2, src3...])`  

dest = target object  
arguments = srcN,

- source keys are copied into the target keys  

- calling this method returns the cloned object  

- if key name already exists, it gets overwritten

- Object.assign replaces for in loops for simple cloning

- spread syntax is another method of cloning 

**nested cloning**  

properties(keys) of an object can be references to other objects

when cloning, the property referencing the object will be copied by reference, so the clone and source share the same reference. This is ***shallow copying***.

**deep cloning (deep copying)**  

`structuredClone() method`  
examine each value of parentObject[key]  

if key == object then the object structure stored in the key will also be replicated as well, not just copied by reference.
            
method can clone most data types
- objects
- arrays
- primitive values
                
***circular reference***  
when an object property references the object itself.

also supported in the structuredClone method
                
structuredClone fails when a key holds a function

to address not supporting functions, we need a combination of 
- cloning methods
- custom code
- take an existing implementation (lodash)
                
### **summary**
        
- objects are assigned and copied by reference (address in memory)

- a real copy is called a clone, completely independent and identical to the original source object

- shallow copies (nested objects are just copied by reference) created using Object.assign or spread syntax
        
- deep cloning  
custom cloning implementation  
properly clones an independent and identical nested object
        
## **GARBAGE COLLECTION**

memory management is performed automatically and in the background of the engine

creating primitives, objects, takes memory

**reachability**  
reachable values

those that are accessible or usabale, guaranteed to be stored in memory.
        
reachable values that can't be deleted
            
currently executing function  
local variables  
parameters
            
functions on the current chain of nested calls  
variables  
parameters  
global variables  
        
reachable values are called ***roots***.

reachability of other values depend if they're reachable from a root by a reference or chain of references.
    
### **garbage collector**

monitors objects and removes those that aren't reachable anymore.
    
an object stores keys that can hold values of any type.

these objects are reachable by reference or chain of references.

if a reference is overwritten, the reference to the object is lost, becoming unreachable, then the garbage collector junks the data and frees memory

### **copying references**

if one reference becomes unreachable, the object is still reachable via copied references.

### **functions with references**
        
a function can link two objects by giving references to each other and return a new object containing both.
    
### **roots**

a global variable accessing an object, if that object has object references, they are reachable.

removing any reference to them, will make them unreachable from the root.

null unlinks an object from the root, removing any reference to it, making it unreachable.

### **mark-and-sweep algorithm**

garbage collector
- takes roots and marks them
- visits and marks all references from the roots
- visits marked objects and marks their references
- visited marked objects are rememebered
- all objects except marked ones are removed

javascript engines apply optimizations to make garbage collection run faster and not introduce delays into the code execution.

### **optimization**

generational collection
objects are split into new and old

**new**  
short term objects are constantly tracked to clear them from memory when needed

**old**  
long term objects that have been marked multiple times become old enough to be examined less
            
**incremental collection**  
- this approach splits multiple object sets into different categories and clears them separately.

- many gargabe collection processes instead of one.

- delays are split in tiny ones instead of a big one.
    
### **V8: garbage collection**

garbage collection solves identifying dead regions of memory.

regions can be re-used or released back to the OS

an object is live if is pointed to by a root object or another live object

root objects are live by default
    
### **summary**

- garbage collection is done automatically and implicitly
- objects are retained in memory while reachable
- being referenced is not the same as being reachable

## **OBJECT METHODS "THIS"**

- objects are created to represent entities 
- an entity can perform actions
- actions are represented by functions in properties (keys)

a function expression can be stored in a property, this is called a ***method***.

a predeclared function can also be assigned as a method.

shorthand syntax for adding methods to objects

```js
let object = {
  methodName() {/*block of code*/};
}
```
    
### **this keyword**

to access the object, a method uses the `this` keyword.

a method can access an object via an outer variable, but is not reliable to produce reusable code

**`this` is not bound**

this can be used in any function, even if is not a method of an object.

the value of this is evaluated during run-time depending on the context.
        
when a function is called without an object using this keyword, `this` becomes `undefined`

in non-strict mode, `this` becomes the global object (window in the browser)

if there's `this` inside a function, the functions is expected to be called in an object context

in other languages `this` keyword is bound to always referencing the object where its used.

in javascript, `this` is free, gets evaluated at call-time it just depends in what is the object that will be used, not where the method was declared.

### **arrow function no this**

`this` in an arrow function refers to the outer normal function.

arrow functions don't separate `this`, they take it from the outer context.
    

## **CONSTRUCT OPERATOR "NEW"**

allows to create multiple objects of the same object.

implements reusable object creation code.

### **constructor functions** 

- are named with capital letters 
- only executed with the `new` operator

### **new.target**

checking inside a function whether it was called with new or not 

undefined for regular calls
    
### **return from constructors**

constructors don't have a return statementbut if there is one:

- if return is called with an object, the object is returned instead of this
- if return is called with a primitive, is ignored
    
if the constructor function doesn't have arguments, when created, parentheses can be skipped.

```js
let user = new User();
// same as
let user = new User;
```
               
## **OPTIONAL CHAINING ?.**

safe way to access nested object properties, even if there's no intermediate property.

### **problem ?. solves**

- user objects hold information about users  
- addresses are stored in user.address
- street is stored in user.address.street
- when some users didn't provide a street, it will throw an error.

getting undefined instead of an error is preferred

attempt to solve the problem

```js
user.address ? user.address.street : undefined
```

attempt 2
```js
user.address && user.address.street && user.address.street.name
```

### **optional chaining solution**

`?.` stops evaluating if the value before ?. is `undefined` or `null`

**value?.prop**  
if value.prop exists, it continues executing, otherwise, it returns `undefined`.
        
```js
user?.address?.street
```

the value is only optional before theoperator

coding errors can be introduced if an object becomes optional, because if the object is undefined, the whole execution might is pointless.

optional chaining works only for declared variables

**variants of optional chaining**

```js
?.()
// calls a function that may not exist
?.[]
```

can be used with delete keyword

```js
delete user?.name
```
    

## **SYMBOL TYPE**

only strings and symbols can be object property keys.

a symbol represents a unique identifier.  
a symbol name can be given as an argument.

symbols are guaranteed to be unique.

descriptions are just labels.

primitive unique value with an optional description.

most values in js implicitly convert to a string

TypeError when trying 

toString() is the only way to show a symbol

symbol.description property shows the description

symbols allow to create hidden private properties of an object, no other code can accidentally access or overwrite

symbols are skipped by `for in` loops and `Object.keys`

`Object.assign` do copy both strings and symbols

### **global symbols**

symbols are different by default, but sometimes we want same-named symbols to be the same entities.

**global symbol registry**  
creates and access symbols guaranteeing repeated access
        
`Symbol.for(key)`
        
### **Symbol.keyFor**
        
returns a name by global symbol
if the symbol is not global, it won't find it and return undefined.

## **OBJECT TO PRIMITIVE CONVERSION**

objects are auto converted to primitives then the operation is carried and a result is a primitive value.

obj1 + obj2 can't be another object, it will return a primitive after coercion.

all objects are true in a boolean context numeric conversion happens when we substract or apply mathematical functions
    
date1 - date2 is possible for date objects

### **hits**
different variants of type conversion

**string**  
where the operation expects a string

**number**  
where the operation expects a number

**default**  
where the operator is not sure what type to expect

all built-in objects except `Date`, implement default conversion the same way as number

**Symbol.toPrimitive**  
built-in symbol  

**toString**   
toString has priority for string conversions 

**valueOf**  
valueOf has priority for math
    
toString and valueOf are a manual way to implement the conversion js does automatically.

if any returns an object, then its ignore as if there's no method.

a plain object has 
- toString returns [object Object]
- valueOf returns the object itself
    
a conversion can return any primitive type

Symbol.toPrimitive is stricter than toString and valueOf as it must return a primitive, otherwise it throws an error.

    