# data types

## **METHODS OF PRIMITIVES**
primitives are not objects  
but they can behave like objects  

### **primitives**  
- string
- number
- bigint
- boolean
- null
- undefined
- symbol

### **non-primitive**

**object**  
    
- stores multiple values as properties (keys).  
- functions can be stored as properties (methods).  
- built-in objects exist with different properties and methods.  
- objects require more resources than primitives.

### **primitive as object**

primitives remain a single value to be as lightweight as possible.
        
an ***object wrapper*** provides extra functionality to a primitive, in order to access to built-in properties and methods.

**object wrappers**  
- String
- Number
- Boolean
- Symbol
- BigInt
    
**toUpperCase()**  
when applied to a string, a special object is created that knows the value of the string.

the method runs (executes) and returns a new string.

the special object is destroyed, leaving the modified primitive alone.

javascript might even skip the object wrapper if not necessary.

### **constructors for String Number Boolean**

only for internal use

 is possible to explicitly create a wrapper with new Number(1) but highly not recommended.

is better to implicitly let the primitive be autowrapped by js

`typeof` will show object for the explicit wrapper.

`if` conditions will evaluate to `true`, regardless if the wrapper is holding a *falsy primitive*.

```js
let zero = new Number(0);
//not good
let zero = Number(0);
//good
```
        
`null` and `undefined` don't have any wrapper objects and provide no methods, in a sense they are the most primitive types

## **NUMBERS**
    
### **regular numbers**

stored in 64-bit format IEE-754 (double precision floating point numbers).

### **bigint numbers**

represent integers of arbitrary length.  
integers that exceed 2^53-1 or less than -(2^53-1).

### **underscores can be used to separate big numbers**
1000 1_000  
10000 10_000  
100000 100_000  
1000000 1_000_000  

### **shorthand syntax for zeroes**

**big numbers**  
appending letter e defining the zeroes count  
1000000000 `1_000_000_000` `1e9`  

**small numbers**  
0.000001 1e-6

### **hexadecimal**

represent colors, encode characters
`0xff` (255)
case insensitive

### **binary and octal number systems**

`0b11111111` binary for of 255 
`0o377` octal form of 255
    
### **toString(base)**

`num.toString(base)`  
returns a string representation of num in the numeral system with the given base.
    
base can vary from 2 to 36, default is 10

**base=16**   
used for hex colors, character encoding  
0-9 or A-F 

**base=2**  
used for debugging bitwise operations  
0 or 1

**base=36**  
0 or A-Z.  
used when we need a long numeric identifier into something shorter (shorten URLs).  
        
calling a method directly after a number needs two period characters `..`  
- js implies a decimal after one `.`
- `..` tells js that decimal is empty

to avoid this issue parentheses can be used as delimiters for the string, then only one `.` is needed.
        
### **rounding numbers**

**Math.floor**   
rounds down   
3.1 to 3  
-1.1 to -2  

**Math.ceil**
rounds up  
3.1 to 4  
-1.1 to 1 

**Math.round**
rounds to the nearest integer  
3.1 to 3  
3.6 to 4  
3.5 to 4 as well 
  
**Math.trunc**  
removes anything after decimal without rounding  
3.1 to 3  
-1.1 to -1  
        
**cut decimals**  
Math.round(num * 100) / 100
            
***toFixed(n)***  
rounds the number to n digits after the point, returns a string representation of the result.
            
zeroes are appended if n requests more decimal than the number has.

64 bits store a number  
52 used to store the digits  
11 store the position of the decimal point  
1 bit for the sign  

when a number overflows the 64-bit storage, it becomes `Infinity`

a number is stored in memory in binary form  
sequence of bits (ones and zeroes)

>fractions 0.1 0.2 0.3 are undending in binary form  

number format **IEEE-754** solves this problem by rounding to the nearest possible number.

toFixed method is most reliable to deal with precision loss.

> unary `+` coerces a value into a number

multiply/divide reduces the error but doesn't remove it.

operators are suited to deal with -0 and 0 the same way.

### **isFinite isNaN**

**Infinity**  
greater than anything  
**-Infinity**   
greater less than anything
        
**NaN**  
represents an error  
doesn't equal to itself  
NaN === NaN false  
        
**isNaN**  
converts argument to a number and then tests it against NaN.
        
**isFinite**  
converts arguments to a number and returns true if regular number, false if Infinity -Infinity and NaN.
        
empty and space-only string is treated as 0 in all numeric functions.

### **Number.isNaN Number.isFinite**

**strict versions**  
they don't autoconvert argument into a number, theycheck if it belongs to the number type instead.

**Number.isNaN(value)**  
returns true if argument is a number and NaN
        
**Number.isFinite(value)**  
returns true if the argument is a number and is not: 
- NaN
- Infinity
- -Infinity

**Object.is**  
compares values like strict equality ===  
NaN equals to NaN  
Object.is(NaN, NaN) returns true  
0 and -0 are different  
Object.is(0, -0) returns false
        
### **parseInt parseFloat**  
numeric conversion using + unary operator or Number() is strict.

if a value is not a number, returns NaN.
        
these methods read a number from a string.

**parseInt**  
`parseInt(str, radix)`  
returns an integer

if first character of a string is not a number, it will return NaN.

***radix*** argument specifies the base of the numeral system

can parse strings of hex numbers binary, octal, etc.
        
**parseFloat**  
returns a floating-point number

### **Math functions**

Math is a built-in object containing mathematical functions and constants.

**Math.random()**  
returns a random number from 0 (inclusive) to 1 (exclusive).
        
**Math.max(a, b, c...) Math.min(a, b, c...)**  
returns greatest and smallest from a list of numbers given.
        
**Math.pow(n, power)**  
returns n raised to the given power
        
## **STRINGS**

UTF-16 internal format for strings

### **Quotes**  

delimiters for strings

quotes, double quotes or backticks

backticks allow to embed any expression into the string using template literals.  
***template literal*** `${}`  
backticks alllow a string to span multiple lines.  



**tagged templates**  
allow us to specify a template function

func\`string\`

the function receives the string and embedded expressions to process them.
        
### **escaping special characters**

**newline character**   
\n  
denotes a line break

**quotes**   
\\' \\"

**backlash**   
\\\

**tab**    
\t  

**unicode character with given hex code in UTF-16 encoding**    
\xXX   
\x7A (z) 

**unicode symbol with hex code in UTF-16**  
\uXXXX  
\u00A9  

**unicode symbol with UTF-32 encoding**  
\x{X...XXXX}  
1 to 6 hex characters  

a string representing a character encoded with two unicode symbols, taking 4 bytes.

emoji characters are encoded with two unicode symbols.
        
### **string length**  
length property of a string   
str.length is a numeric property, not a function,  
no need to call str.length()  

### **accessing characters**  

use **square brackets** string[pos]  
modern way

square brackets return undefined if no character is found at pos.

        
**call method str.charAt(pos)**  
historical way

returns an empty string if no character is found at pos.
        
### **strings are immutable**

can't be changed

the solution is to create a new string and assign it to the variable holding the original string.

```js
let variableName = 'string';
variableName = 'new string';
```

### **upper and lower case**
'string'.toUpperCase()
'STRING'.toLowerCase()

single character case modification
'string'[1].toUpperCase()
    
### **substrings**

partial amount of characters of a string

**`str.indexOf(substr, pos)`**  
            
looks for substr in str

starting from given pos

useful when we found a match and we want to do a search after that given pos.

returns the position where the match was found.

returns -1 if nothing found.

search is case sensitive

in an if condition, evaluating the returned value from indexOf would not work if substring is found at position 0, as 0 is false in if statements.

```js
'string'.indexOf('str', 0); //returns 0 as str is found at index 0
if('string'.indexOf('str', 0)) {
  return true;
} // if condition wouldn't evaluate to true

```

evaluating the indexOf returned value against != -1 includes 0 in true values as the only false explicitly defined is -1

```js
if ('string'.indexOf('str', 0) != -1) {
  return true;
} // index 0 will be included as a truthy condition
```

**`str.lastIndexOf(substr, position)`**

searches from the end of a string to its beginning.

lists occurrences in reverse order.

```js
let string = 'string with multiple words';

console.log(string.lastIndexOf('words', 26));
```

### **bitwise NOT** 

**~ bitwise not operator**  

converts a number to 32-bit integer (removes decimals)

reverses all bits in binary representation

`~n == -(n + 1)`

a number is only 0 if its -1, so 

```js
if(~str.indexOf('substr')){/*block*/}
```

### **str.includes**
### **str.startsWith** 
### **str.endsWith**

modern methods 

`str.includes(substr, pos)`  
returns true/false
depending if str contains substr
        
tests matches, don't return index position

```js
string.includes('words');
```

`str.startsWith(substr, pos)`    
returns true if the str starts with the substr
        
`str.endsWith(substr, pos)`      
returns true if the str ends with substr

### **`str.slice(start [, end])`**

returns a substring from start to (excluding) end 

without end argument, slice goes to the end of the string

negative values are allowed, the start is counted from the string end 
        
the final character of a string has a negative index of -1

### **`str.substring(start [, end])`**

returns the substring between start and end

similar to slice, but allows start to be greater than end

equivalents  
(2, 6)  
(6, 2)
        
negative argumentss are not supported, treated as 0

### **`str.substr(start [, length])`**

returns substring from start with given length
  
start can be negative to start from the end

### **comparing strings**

lowercase letter is always greater than an uppercase  
`'a' > 'Z' == true`

letters with diacritical marks are out of order  
`'Ö' > 'Z' == true`

all strings are encoded in UTF-16

each character has a numeric code

`str.codePointAt(pos)`  
returns the code for the character at given position

`str.fromCodePoint(code)`  
creates a character by given numeric code
        
unicode characters \uXXXX can be used as strings

a has a higher unicode character (97) number than A (65)

### **correct comparisons**

modern browsers support ECMA-402

special method to compare strings in different languages
        
`str.localeCompare(str2)`  
returns an integer indicating if str is less, equal or greater than str2
            
- str < str2  
returns negative number
- str > str2  
returns positive number
- str = str2  
returns 0
            
additonal two arguments allow to specify the language and setup additional rules (case sensitivity, all a's should be treated like a's).

### **internals unicode**

characters have 2-byte codes  
2 bytes only allow 65,536 combinations 
        
**surrogated pairs**

symbols that are encoded in a pair of 2-byte codes
        
length of a surrogated pair is always 2

appeared later in the language, thus, js doesn't natively process them correctly

`String.fromCodePoint`  
`str.codePointAt`  
deal with surrogated pairs correctly
        
`String.fromCharCode`  
`str.charCodeAt`  
legacy methods  
don't support surrogated pairs correctly  
        
pieces of the surrogated pairs don't mean anything without being together.

index 0 and index 1

0xd800 - 0xdbff  
codes that belong to the first pair   

oxdc00 - oxdfff  
codes that belong to the second pair  
        
**diacritical marks and normalization**  

some languages have symbols composed of base character with a mark decorating above or below.
            
composite characters have their own code in the UTF-16 table.

arbitrary compositions can be done by using different characters.

- base character code
- mark character code
            
arbitrary compositions may look visually the same but are represented with a different combination

- base character + mark above + mark below
- base character + mark below + mark above

unicode normalization fixes this
`str.normalize()`

## **ARRAYS**

ordered collection of values  

useful for 
- users
- goods
- HTML elements

objects don't provide any methods to manage the order of elements, we can't insert a property in between two.

elements (Values stored in the array), are numbered (indexed) starting at 0.


### **array declaration**

```js
//new constructor

let arr = new Array();

//array literal
let arr = [];
//initial elements can be supplied right at declaration
``` 
    
### **elements can be reassigned**

`fruits[2] = 'pear';`
    
### **length**

total count of elements stored in an array
        
### **arrays can store elements of any type**

- primitives
- objects

if a function is stored at index 3, `array[3]();` would call it
        
trailing commas can also be added in arrays

### **array.at()**

negative indexes are allowed in other programming languages to specify the index from starting from the end.  

negative index will return undefined in js.

to explicitly calculate indexes starting from the end

`array[array.length - 1]`

array.at() implicitly calculates it for us  
`array.at(-1)`
        
### **queue**

ordered collection of elements that supports
            
**push**
appends an element to the end

**shift**
removes(gets) an element from the beginning, so the second element becomes the first
        
first pushed item, received first (FIFO)
        
    
### **stack**

new elements are added or taken always from the end
new elements are added on top or taking from the top of the stack (the end)
    
latest pushed item, first received (LIFO)
    
arrays can behave like queues and stacks

### **deque**

a data structure that allows to behave like a queue and stack
    
### **pop()**

extracts the last element of the array and returns it

pop and at(-1) do the same, but pop modifies the array, at(-1) just returns the last element
    
### **push()**
      
append an element to the end of the array
        
equal to `fruits[fruits.length]` (as length is always equal to index + 1)

### **shift()**

extracts first element of the array and returns it
    
### **unshift()**

add an element to the beginning of an array
    
push and unshift can add multiple elements at once

### **internals**

square brackets are used to access a property (element) in an array.

heritage from object syntax. arrays are objects.

element becomes a property (key-value pair), where the index is the name (key).

can be copied by reference.

multiple variables can hold references to the same array.
            
engine stores elements in contiguous memory.

ways to misuse an array

- a non-numeric property  
`arr.test = 5;`
- make gaps between elements  
`arr[0] arr[1000]`
- fill the array in reverse order  
`arr[1000] arr[999]`
        
arrays are optimized to work with ordered values (data).

should only be used when we want to manipulate ordered data
        
### **performance**

working on the end of an array is faster than at the beginning

**push pop are fast**  
cleans index  
shortens length  
other elements keep their indexes, no need to update them  

**shift, unshift are slow**  
remove index n.  
move elements to the left updating their indexes.  
update the length property.  
the more elements, the slower it gets.  
        
### ****loops**
        
**for loop over indexes**  
old school way of iterating over array items
        
**for of loops are designed for arrays**  

for (let element of array) {block}

doesn't access the indexes, just the value.

**for in loop iterates over all properties not only numeric ones**  

optimized for general objects, much slower than for of optimized for arrays.

### **array-like objects exist in the browser and other environments**

arrays that contain non-numeric properties

### **length**

automatically updates when modifying the array

`length == lastIndex + 1`

increasing the length , will produce nothing
        
decreasing the length 
the array becomes truncated 
irreversible process 

simplest way of clearing an array

`arr.length = 0`
        
### **new Array()**

square brackets are shorter so new constructor is rarely used

when called with a single numeric argument, will create the length but won't add any elements

### **multidimensional arrays**

can store matrices 

### **toString()**

own implementation that returns a string list of elements separated by commas

**String(array)**

arrays don't implement toPrimitive or valueOf.  
can only implement toString.  
        
- [] becomes an ''
        
- [1] becomes '1'
        
- [1, 2] + 1 becomes '1,21'
    
### **don't compare arrays with abstract equality ==

operator doesn't treat arrays different than normal objects

objects are equal == only if they are references to the same object

if primite == object or object == primitive  
object coerces to primitive.
        
null and undefined equal to each other and nothing else 

[] == []  
objects referencing different in-memory areas so they don't equal to each other
        
[0] == [0]  
still different objects
        
0 == []  
empty array coerces into an empty string,  
empty string coerces into a 0  
true  

'0' == []   
'0' is not an empty string,   
!empty string != 0   
[] is a 0   
false   

### **how to compare arrays?

- not with abstract equality

- compare them item by item or iteration methods
    
## **ARRAY METHODS**

### **add or remove elements (items)**
- push
- pop
- shift
- unshift
    
### **delete an element**

delete keyword

deletes the element, but doesn't update the length

`delete obj.key` syntax removes value of the key, but not the key
        
### **splice()**

can insert, remove and replace elements

`arr.splice(start [, deleteCount, elem1, ..., elemN])`
        
modifies array from the index start  
removes deleteCount elements  
inserts elem1 ... elem2  
        
`arr.splice(1, 1)`
from index 1, remove 1 element
        
`arr.splice(0, 3, elem1 elem2)`
from index 0, remove 3 elements, add elem1 and elem2
        
negative indexes are allowed in splice

### **slice()**

`arr.slice([start], [end])`
**returns** a new array copying all elements from start to end(excluded).

both start and end can be negative  
creates subarrays

cloning can be done with slice() without any arguments passed. creates a copy for further manipulation without altering the original array.
    
### **concat()**

`arr.concat(arg1, arg2...)`
accepts any number of arguments (arrays or values).

**returns** an array containing elements from array, concatenates arg1, argN.

other objects that aren't arrays are added as a whole 

[object Object]
        
> if an object has `Symbol.isConcatSpreadable` property, then concat will treat it as an array
    
### **forEach()**

`arr.forEach(function(item, index, array))`
runs a function for every element of the array
    
### **indexOf()**

`arr.indexOf(item, from)`
looks for item, starting from index

**returns** the index if found, otherwise -1.

because of this, NaN is not handled properly, as NaN would **return** -1 

uses strict equality

if looking for false, it will only search false and not anything that can be converted to boolean false ('', 0, null, undefined, [], {})

**returns** the first item found
    
### **lastIndexOf()**

starts looking from right to left (end to start)

**returns** the first item found
    
### **includes()**

looks for item starting from index 

**returns** true if found

handles NaN correctly,
**returns** true if found
        
### **find()**

`arr.find(function(item, index, array)) {block}`
finds an object with a specific condition in an array.

***item***  
element  
***index***  
index of the element  
***array***  
array itself  
        
if the function **returns** true, the search is stopped and the item is returned, otherwise returns undefined.

only a single element makes the function return true.

array of objects are common so find() is very useful.

one argument (item) is typical, more arguments are rarely used.

### **findIndex()**

`arr.findIndex(function(item, index, array) => {block})`
        
the same as `find()` but instead of returning the element, it returns the index of the element

-1 if nothing is found

### **findLastIndex()**

        same as findIndex but searches from right to left (end to start)
    
### **filter()**

`arr.filter(function(item, index, array)){block}`

for many elements that will return true in the filter function.

find() only returns one element.

### **map()**

`arr.map(function(item, index, array)) {block}`
**returns** new value instead of element (item)

calls a function for each element of the array, returns the array of results.

transforms an element into the value returned from the function called by map.

### **sort()**

`arr.sort()`
sorts the array in place, changing its element order

items are sorted as strings by default, elements are converted to strings.

to use a custom order, we need to supply a function as an argument

function should compare arbitrary values and return 1, 0 or -1.

a comparison is only required to return a positive number to say greater and negative to say less.

### **localeCompare**
string order is ditctated by each character unicode.

to correctly ordered the alphabet localeCompare is used.

### **reverse()**

reverses the order of the elements in the array

returns the array after the reversal

### **split()**

splits a string into an array by given delimiter.

additional argument defines the limit on the array length.
    
calling split('') with an empty string, will split the string into an array of characters.

### **join()**
        
`arr.join(glue)`
creates a string of an array joining the elements by glue between them.

tools to iterate over an array
- forEach
- for
- for..of

tool to iterate and return data for each element of an array
- map
- reduce
- reduceRight
    
### **reduce()**

`arr.reduce(function(accumulator, item, index, array) {block}[, initial]);`

function is applied to all array elements, carries on result to the next call.

***accumulator***

result of the previous function call

equals to initial the first time, if initial is provided

accumulator stores the combined result of all previous executions, becomes what reduce returns.

***item***

current item of array

the element's value is used in the function

***index***

current item index position

***array***

the array itself
        
if reduced is called on an empty array and there's no initial value set explicitly, it will return an error.

### **reduceRight()**

does the same as reduce() but from end to start of the array.
    
### **Array.isArray**

typeof doesn't distinguish between array and object because arrays are a type of object.

`Array.isArray(value)`
returns true if the value is an array
        
### **thisArg**

methods that call functions accept this optional parameter, except sort.

`arr.find(function, thisArg)`  
`arr.filter(function, thisArg)`  
`arr.map(function, thisArg)`  

the value of thisArg becomes this, for function.

without thisArg the function is called as standalone and this is undefined.

## **ITERABLES**

iterable objects are a generalization of arrays

allows to use any object in a for..of loop

optimized for other objects that represent a collection, just not ordered.

### **Symbol.iterator**

special built-in symbol that allows to make objects iterable by for..of loops.

method that returns an iterator, an object with the next() method.

`next()` returns `{done: boolean, value: any}`  

`done=true` the loop has finished
`done=false`, value is the next value
        
### strings are iterable

a for..of loop iterates over a string characters
```js
for (let char of 'string') {
  console.log(char);
}
```
    
works correctly with surrogated pairs
    
calling iterator explicitly

### **iterables**

objects that implement Symbol.iterator

strings are iterable and array-like

iteration and enumerable properties become available to other object types.
- for..of works
- numeric indexes and length

### **array-likes**

objects that have indexes and length
    
both iterables and array-likes don't have array methods

### **Array.from**

takes an iterable or array-like value and makes a real array from it, this allows us to call array methods on iterables and array-likes.

`Array.from(obj[, mapFn, thisArg])`

mapFn can be a function applied to each element before being added to the array.

thisArg sets this for the function.

`Array.from(str)`

can split a str into array of characters  
support surrogated pairs
        
can help building a slice function that is surrogate-aware

## **MAP AND SET**

objects are used to stored keyed collections

arrays stor ordered collections

### **Map object**

collection of keyed data items just like an object

map allows keys of any type

- `new Map()`
creates the map
- `map.set(key, value)`
stores the value by the key
- `map.get(key)`
returns the value by the key,  
undefined if key doesn't exist in map
- `map.has(key)`
returns true if key exists
- `map.delete(key)`
removes value by the key
- `map.clear()`
removes everything from the map
- `map.size`
returns current element count
        
in maps, keys are not converted to strings, they can be any type.

set and get replace dot notation and square brackets

> **keys can be objects**, most important and notable feature of maps.
        
map compares keys using the SameValueZero algorithm

works like strict equality, but NaN is considered equal to NaN

**chaining calls**  

each map.set call returns the map itself, so it can be chained.
        
**iterating over a map**

- `map.keys()`
returns an iterable for keys
- `map.values()`
returns an iterable for values
- `map.entries()`
returns iterable for entries [key, value],  
used by default in for..of
        
**forEach()**

smiliar to array

**Object.entries**

when map is created, an array (or other iterable) can be passed as argument with key/value pairs for initializing the map.

to convert a plain object into a map

- `Object.entries(obj)`
returns an array of key/value pairs for an object
        
- `Object.fromEntries`
creates a plain object given an array of key/value pairs
        
### **Set**

special type collection

a set of values without keys, each value may occur only once.

**methods**

`new Set(iterable)`
creates the set.  
if an iterable object is provided, copies values into the set.

`set.add(value)`
adds a value, returns the set

`set.delete(value)`
removes a value, returns true if value existed.

`set.has(value)`
returns true if the value exists in the set.

`set.clear()`
removes everything from the set.

`set.size`
is the elements count.
        
repeated calls of set.add(sameValue) won't do anything as values appear only once in a set.

perfect for storing only one ocurrence of an event without duplicates.

an alternative to a set is finding duplicates with find(), but performance is low.

**iteration over a set**

can be done with `for..of` loops or using `forEach`
        
same methods for iterators on Map

`set.keys()`
returns an iterable object for values.

`set.values()`
same as set.keys() just for compatibility with Map.

`set.entries()`
returns iterable object for entries [value, value], comp. with Map.
        
iteration over map and set is always in the insertion order, elements can't be reordered or diretly accessed by its number (index?).

## **WEAKMAP AND WEAKSET**

javascript keeps a value in memory, while its reachable (ready to be used).

properties of an object are considerable reachable, while the data structure (object, array, map, date) is in memory.

objects that exist as properties in other object data structres, are reachable as long as their parent object is reachable.

WeakMap doesn't prevent garbage-collection of key objects.

WeakMap keys must be objects not primitive values.

WeakMap doesn't support iteration and methods
- keys()
- values()
- entries()
    
`weakMap.get(key)`
`weakMap.set(key, value)`
`weakMap.has(key)`

main usecase of weakmaps is to be an additional data storage.

code keeping count of visiting users 

information is stored in a map

a user object is key and visit count value

if user leaves, then visit count should be stopped for that user

**caching**  
another usecase for weakMap
    
### **WeakSet**

analogous to set

may only add objects not primitives

like WeakMap when it comes to garbage-collection

it supports
- add
- has
- delete

doesn't
- size 
- keys
- iterations

## **OBJECT.KEYS VALUES ENTRIES**

generic methods to iterate over data structures
- keys()
- values()
- entries()
    
common agreement to use them to iterate over data structures.

supported for
- Map
- Set
- Array

plain objects support similar methods
- `Object.keys(obj)`
- `Object.values(obj)`
- `Object.entries(obj)`
    
difference is calling Object.keys(obj) and not obj.keys()

Object.methods **return** a real array not just an iterable.

`Object.values(obj)`
can be used to loop over property values

for..in loops and Object.keys/values/entries ignore symbolic properties

`Object.getOwnPropertySymbols`
returns an array of only symbolic keys
    
`Reflect.ownKeys(obj)`
returns all keys
    
**transforming objects**    
objects lack methods that exists for arrays'

`Object.entries(obj)` 
gets an array of key/value pairs from obj.

array methods can be used to transform, key/value pairs.

`Object.fromEntries(array)` 
turns the array back into an object

## **DESTRUCTURING ASSIGNMENT**
    
Object and Array are the two most common data structures in js.

objects allow to create a single entity that stores data items by key.

arrays allow to gather data items into an ordered list.

### **destructuring assignment**

allows us to unpack arrays or objects into a bunch of variables

### **array destructuring**

allows to work with variables instead of array elements(members)

```js

arrayToBeDestrutured = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8];

let [elem1, elem2, elemN] = arrayToBeDestructured;

// shortcut to
let elem1 = array[0]
let elem2 = array[1]
let elem3 = array[2]
```

ignoring a certain element in an array is done by leaving an empty space delimited by commas where that element should be.

`[elem1, elem2, elem3, ,elem5]`

any assignable to the left of the = operator is allowed   
an object property
        
**entries()**  
looping over keys/values of an object
        
### **swapping variables**

trick to swap values of two values using a destructuring assignment.

```js
let var1 = 'value1';
let var2 = 'value2';

[guest, admin] = [admin, guest];
```
    
### **rest ... operator**

gathers remaining elements into one array

...rest or it can be any legal variable name.

if array is shorter than the list of variables, absent elements return undefined.

### **default values**

replace missing values
    
default values can be complex expressions or even function calls.

evaluated only if the value is not provided.

```js
// default values are useful for secondary arguments.
// best practice
function multiply(a, b = 10) {
  return a * b;
}

console.log(multiply(2, 2));

// if the first parameter for some reason can be optional,
// this is a work around
function sum(a = 10, b) {
  return a + b;
}

console.log(sum(undefined, 2));
```

### **Object destructuring**

destructuring also work with objects

`let {var1, var2} = {var1:value1, var2:value2}`

- the variableName is propertyName  
- the variableValue is propertyValue

assign a property to a variable with another name
    
### **...rest pattern**

works just like it does with arrays

we can destructure properties of an object with existing variables, without declaring them at the same time as destructuring.

it has to be wrapped in parentheses to work, otherwise javascript treats `{...}` as a code block not destructuring.
    
### **nested destructuring**

when objects or arrays have other nested objects and arrays.

## **DATE AND TIME**

stores date, time and provides methods for date/time management.

### **creation**

**`new Date()` constructor**  
without arguments, creates an object with the current date and time.
    
**Date(milliseconds)**
miliseconds are the base unit for Date objects  
1/1000 of a second

### **timestamp**

integer representing the number of milliseconds since 1970.
    
0 milliseconds means 01.01.1970 UTC+0

a timestamp can always be the argument of Date().

a Date object can be converted to a timestamp using `date.getTime()`

dates before 1970 have negative timestamps

### **new Date(datestring)**
        
single string argument, is parsed automatically.

algorithm is the same as `Date.parse()`

time is not set like this, so it will be by default midnight, and adjusted to the timezone where the code is executed.
    
### **new Date(YYYY, MM, DD, HH, MM, SS, MS)**

***year***  
should have 4 digits  
2 digits are valid, but would mean 19xx  

***month***  
count starts from 0  
0 is January  
11 is December  

***date***  
day of the month, if absent, 1 is default.

***hours, minutes, seconds, milliseconds***  

absent are 0 by default
    
### **methods to access the date object**

components relative to the local time zone

- `getFullYear()`
- `getMonth()`
- `getDate()`
- `getHours() getMinutes() getSeconds() getMilliseconds()`
- `getYear()`
deprecated method that would return 2 digit year sometimes

**getDay()**

gets the day of the week  
0 sunday  
6 saturday  

**UTC counterparts**

components for the timezone UTC+0  
all of the above have a UTC counterpart
        
**getTime()**

returns timestamp of the date  
number of milliseconds passed from Jan 1st 1970 UTC+0  

**getTimezoneOffset()**

returns difference between UTC and local time zone in minutes
        
### **setting date components**
- `setFullYear(year, [month], [date])`
- `setMonth(month, [date])`
- `setDate(date)`
- `setHours(hour, [min], [sec], [ms])`
- `setMinutes(min, [sec], [ms])`
- `setSeconds(sec, [ms])`
- `setMilliseconds(ms)`
- `setTime(milliseconds)`
    
every one except setTime() has a UTC variant
    
### **autocorrection**

if we mistype a range (35 for date), it will auto-adjust to the next month

addresses leap days
    
### **date to number**

when a Date is converted to number, it becomes a timestamp

same as date.getTime()

dates can be substracted, difference is in ms.

### **Date.now()**

returns current timestamp

semantically equivalent to `new Date().getTime()`, it just doesn't create a Date object to get to a timestamp.

faster as there's no need to garbage collect the Date object

benchmarking
    
### **Date.parse from a string**

`Date.parse(str)`  
can read date from a string

> string format should be YYYY-MM-DDTHH:mm:ss.sssZ
        
***YYYY-MM-DD***  
year-month-day

***T***  
delimiter character  

***HH:mm:ss.sss***  
hours, minues, seconds and milliseconds

***Z***  
timezone in the format +-hh:mm  
single Z meants UTC+0
        
returns the timestamp of the given date, if the format is invalid, returns NaN.

## **JSON METHODS TOJSON**

### **JSON**

javascript object notation

general format to represent values and objects

described as in RFC4627 standard
    
supports data types
- ***objects {...}***
- ***arrays [...]***
- ***primitives***  
strings  
numbers  
boolean  
null  


### **JSON.stringify**

converts objects into JSON

the resulting JSON string is an object called 
- JSON encoded 
- serialized
- stringified
- marshalled
        
can be applied to primitives
    
    
**differences between JSON encoded object and obejct literal**  

- strings use double quotes. no single quotes or backticks  
'rafael' becomes "rafael"

- object property names are double quoted   
age: 30 becomes "age": 30
        

### **JSON.parse**

converts JSON into an object

some javascript-specific object properties are skipped
- functions (methods)
- symbolic keys and values
- properties storing undefined
    
nested objects are supported and converted automatically

there must be no circular references

```js
object = {
    key: circularReference
}
// is not strigified
```
    
excluding and transforming: replacer

`JSON.stringify(value, [replacer, space])`
passing an array of properties, will encode only those properties.

a function can be used instead of the replacer
            
called for every (key, value) pair, returns replaced value

undefined if the value is to be skipped

`: [object Object]`
wrapper object as the first key/value pair  
key is empty  
value is the target object  

**formatting: space parameter**

all stringified objects had no indents and exptra spaces

the space argument is used for a nice output,

number of spaces to use for pretty formatting

tells js to show nested objects on multiple lines

the argument as a string is used for indentation instead of number of spaces

custom toJSON

### JSON.parse

`JSON.parse(str, [reviver]);`

***str***  
JSON-string to parse

***reviver***  
optional function(key, value) called for each pair to transform the value

### **summary of legal JSON syntax**

property name should be delimited by double quotes

single quotes and backticks not allowed

no new constructor is allowed only bare values

comments are not supported
        
the syntax is strict to allow easy, reliable and fast implementations of the parsing algorithm

### **reviver**

allows to deserialize an object to parse it 'as is'

        



    
