# reacting to input with state

instead of manipulating individual pieces of UI, the different states are 'described' and switch between them in response to user input.

how the UI can change in response to user actions
- typing something into a form enables the submit button
- pressing submit disables the submit button and loading spinner appears.
- form is hidden and thank you message appears if successful
- network request fails, an error appears and form becomes enabled to try again.

imperative programming explicitly instructs the UI how to change in response to exact interactions each step on the way.

imperative means to command each element.

imperative state manipulation is fine for isolated components but is exponentially difficult to scale.

in react's declarative approach, you describe what to show, and react figures out how to update the UI.

to understand state
- **identify** component's visual states
- **determine** what triggers those state changes
- **represent** state in memory using `useState`
- **remove** non-essential state variables
- **connect** event handlers to set state

a state machine can be in one of several states.

different states of a UI
- **empty** form with a disabled submit button
- **typing** enabled submit button
- **submitting** for is disabled, spinner is shown
- **success** thank you message is displayed
- **error** comes back to typing state, displaying an error to fix input and try again.

```jsx
// simple state of a react form
export default function Form({
  // empty, submitting, error, success
  status = 'empty'
}) {
  if (status === 'success') {
    return <h1>That's right!</h1>
  }
  return (
    <>
      <h2>city quiz</h2>
      <p>
        in which city is there a billboard that turns air into drinkable water?
      </p>
      <form>
        <textarea 
          disabled={
            status === 'submitting'
          }
        />
        <br />
        <button
          disabled={
            status === 'empty' ||
            status === 'submitting'
          }
        > 
          submit
        </button>
        {
          status === 'error' &&
          <p className='error'>
            good guess but a wrong answer, try again!
          </p>
        }
      </form>
    </>
  )
}
```

showing all possible visual states in one page is convenient when fine tuning the component's state visual appearance and logic.

Pages often called living styleguides or storybooks.

```jsx
import Form from './Form.js';

let statuses = [
  'empty',
  'typing',
  'submitting',
  'success',
  'error',
];

export default function App() {
  return (
    <>
      {statuses.map(status => (
        <section key={status}>
          <h4>Form ({status}): </h4>
          <Form status={status}/>
        </section>
      ))}
    </>
  )
}
```

reasons to trigger state changes
- human inputs (clicking a button, typing in a field, navigating a link)
- computer inputs (network response arriving, timeout completing, image loading)

state variables in a form
- text input change (human) switches to **typing**.
- submitting the form (human) switches to **submitting**.
- successful network response (computer) switches to **success**.
- failed network response switches to **error**.

human inputs often require event handlers

state in memory is represented with `useState`

some states are a must

```jsx
// possible states
const [answer, setAnswer] = useState('');
const [error, setError] = useState('null');

const [isEmpty, setIsEmpty] = useState(true);
const [isTyping, setIsTyping] = useState(false);
const [isSubmitting, setIsSubmitting] = useState(false);
const [isSuccess, setIsSuccess] = useState(false);
const [isError, setIsError] = useState(false);
```

rules of state variables
- states shouldn't cause a paradox (were both states can't be true or false at the same time)
- `answer.length === 0` removes the need of `isEmpty`, the same information is available in another variable.
- inverting state can avoid duplicating unnecessary states
`isError` is just `error !== null` 

```jsx
// cleaned up state
const [answer, setAnswer] = useState('');
const [error, setError] = useState(null);
const [status, setStatus] = useState('typing'); // 'typing', 'submitting', 'success'
```

final simple react form

```jsx
import { useState } from 'react';

export default function Form() {
  const [answer, setAnswer] = useState('');
  const [error, setError] = useState(null);
  const [status, setStatus] = useState('typing');

  if (status === 'success') {
    return <h1>that's right!</h1>
  }

  async function handleSubmit(e) {
    e.preventDefault();
    setStatus('submitting');
    try {
      await submitForm(answer);
      setStatus('success');
    } catch (err) {
      setStatus('typing');
      setError(err);
    }
  }

  function handleTextareaChange(e) {
    setAnswer(e.target.value);
  }

  return (
    <>
      <h2>city quiz</h2>
      <p>
        in which city is there a billboard that turns air into drinkable water?
      </p>
      <form>
        <textarea 
          value={answer}
          onChange={handleTextareaChange}
          disabled={status === 'submitting'}
        />
        <br />
        <button
          disabled={
            answer.length === 0 ||
            status === 'submitting'
          }
        >
          Submit
        </button>
        {error !== null && (
          <p className='error'>
            {error.message}
          </p>
        )}
      </form>
    </>
  );
}

function submitForm(answer) {
  // simulate an http request, response
  return new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
    setTimeout(() => {
      let shouldError = answer.toLowerCase() !== 'lima';
      if (shouldError) {
        reject(new Error('good guess but wrong answer! Try again...'));
      } else {
        resolve();
      }
    }, 1500);
  })
}
```

expressing interactions as state changes allows to scale interactivity in an app.

# choosing state structure

principles to choose state structure
- group related state (variables that update at the same time can be grouped)
- avoid contradictions in state (paradoxes)
- avoid redundant state (calculate info from props or existing state variable not as a separate component state)
- avoid duplication in state (same data duplicated between state variables or nested objects)
- avoid deeply nested state (flat state structure is preferred)

> make state easy to update without introducing mistakes

group related state variables

```jsx
const [x, setX] = useState(0);
const [y, setY] = useState(0);

// grouped
const [position, setPosition] = useState({ x: 0, y: 0});
```

when using an object as state, all other fields should be copied

```jsx
setPosition({...position, x: 100});
```

### contradiction in state

```jsx
const [text, setText] = useState('');
const [isSending, setIsSending] = useState(false);
const [isSent, setIsSent] = useState(false);

async function handleSubmit(e) {
  e.preventDefault();
  setIsSending(true);
  await sendMessage(text);
  setIsSending(false);
  setIsSent(true);
}
```

### redundant state

```jsx
function Message({ messageColor }) {
  const [color, setColor] = useState(messageColor);
}
```

state is only initialized during first render, so if the parent component updates `messageColor` the state variable won't update.

mirroring props in a state variable is bad.

mirroring props into state is only useful when ignoring the updates is the desired outcome.

```jsx
function Message({ initialColor }) {
  // The `color` state variable holds the *first* value of `initialColor`.
  // Further changes to the `initialColor` prop are ignored.
  const [color, setColor] = useState(initialColor);
}
```

### duplicated state

```jsx
const [items, setItems] = useState(initialItems);
const [selectedItem, setSelectedItem] = useState(
  items[0]
);
```

instead of `selectedItem` object, hold `selectedId` in state and then get a `selectedItem` by searching items array for an item with that ID.

```jsx
const [items, setItems] = useState(initialItems);
const [selectedId, setSelectedId] = useState(0);

const selectedItem = items.find(item =>
  item.id === selectedId
);
```

### deeply nested state

updating nested states requires making copies of objects recursively. Code can get complex.

flattening state should improve.

# sharing state between components

lifting state up is removing the state of components, moving it up to the closest common parent and then passing down the state via props.

3 steps to lift state up
- remove state from children
- pass hardcoded data from common parent
- add state to common parent and pass it down together with event handlers

common to call a stateful component 'uncontrolled' because the parent elements can't influence their state.

a component is controlled when important information is driven by props rather than local state.

uncontrolled

easier to setup, less flexible to coordinate.

controlled

completely flexible, require parent to fully configure props.


# preserving and resetting state

state is isolated between components.

controlling when to preserve and to reset state between re-renders is possible.

## UI tree

browsers use many tree structures to model UI.

DOM represents HTML elements.

CSSOM represents css declarations.

there's also an accessibility tree.

react uses tree structures to manage and model the UI.

react makes UI trees from JSX.

react DOM updates the browser DOM to match the new UI tree.

state lives inside react. React associates each state with the correnct component.

state can be isolated and independent as its rendered as its own component in the UI tree.

react keeps the state as long as the component is rendered in the same position in the UI tree.

> when react moves a component to a different position in the UI tree, the state is destroyed.

```jsx
{isFancy ? (
  <Counter isFancy={true} />
) : (
  <Counter isFancy={false} />
)}
```

both counters are rendered at the same position so state doesn't reset.

react can't tell the conditions in a functional component, all it cares is the tree it returns. If the true returns the same component in the same position, state won't reset.

seeing `<Counter />>` as the first child of the `<div>` is why react considers the same counter in a way.

## different components at the same position reset state

also the state of the entire subtree is reset if there's different components at the same position in the UI tree.

to preserve state between re-renders, structure of the tree needs to match from one render to another.

## resetting state at same position

by default react preserves state of a component while staying at the same position.

- render components in different positions
- give each component a `key`

> specifying a `key` tells react to use the `key` as part of the position instead of their order within the parent.

even if rendering ocurrs in the same place, the key is used to determine the position.

## resetting a form with a key

react recreates the dom elements instead of reusing them when a key is used.

- lifting state up ensures the messages aren't removed as they would be stored in the parent.

- using `localStorage` is another solution

# extracting state logic with a reducer

`useReducer` consolidates all state update logic outside of a component.

instead of setting state, you define user actions by 'dispatching' them from event handlers.

the object passed to dispatch is called an 'action'.

it is typical to give a `type` property with a string value to the action object to describe the action. Pass any additional information in other fields.

a reducer function is where the state logic is executed. Takes two arguments `currentState` and `action` object. Returns `nextState`.

react will set the state to what's returned from the reducer.

javascript `reduce` takes the result so far and the current item of an array and then returns the next result.

hookup reducer function

# passing data deeply with context

passing props can become verbose and inconvenient if props have to pass through middle components.

context lets the parent component make information available to any component in the tree below it

create context in 3 steps
1. create context (`levelContext`)
2. use context from the component that needs data (heading)
3. provide that context from component that specifies data (Section)

1. create and export context from a file so components use it

```js
import {createContext} from 'react';

export const LevelContext = createContext(1); // pass any value as state
```

2. use the context

```js
import { useContext } from 'react';
import { LevelContext } from './LevelContext.js';
```

if the context isn't provided, react will use the default value specified in the `context.js` file where `createContext` is used

3. provide the context

```js
import { LevelContext } from './LevelContext.js';

export default function Section({ level, children }) {
  return (
    <section className="section">
      <LevelContext.Provider value={level}>
        {children}
      </LevelContext.Provider>
    </section>
  );
}
```

the `heading` components will use the value of the nearest `LevelContext.Provider`

summary
- pass a `level` prop to `<Section>`
- `Section` wraps children into `<LevelContext.Provider value={level}>`
- `Heading` asks the closest value of `LevelContext`

## using and providing context from the same component

```js
// Section.js
import { useContext } from 'react';
import { LevelContext } from './LevelContext.js';

export default function Section({ children }) {
  const level = useContext(LevelContext);
  return (
    <section className="section">
      <LevelContext.Provider value={level + 1}>
        {children}
      </LevelContext.Provider>
    </section>
  );
}
```

context can pass down any information needed by the entire subtree
- current color theme
- current logged in user
- etc

## context passes through middle components

> context lets you write components that adapt to their surroundings and display themselves differently depending on where they are being rendered.

the only way to override some context is to wrap children into a context provider with a different value

don't overuse context

- start by passing props, if data flow benefits from being explicitly declared, passing props is ideal
- extract components and pass JSX as children where data is passed through many layers of intermediate components that don't use the data.

## use cases for context

- theming (dark mode) a context provider at the top of the app, so context is provided to components that need to adjust their value based on the theme
- account - many components will need to know the currently logged in user. Context makes it convenient to read anywhere in the same tree. Some apps allow multiple accounts to be operated
- routing - routing solutions use context to determine what link is active or not.
- common to use a reducer together with context to manage complex state and pass it down to distant components.

# scaling up with reducer and context

reducers consolidate state update logic.

context allow to pass information to deeply nested components.

steps to combine a reducer with context
1. create context
2. put state and dispatch into context
3. use context anywhere in the tree

1. create context

`useReducer` returns current tasks and dispatch function.

create two separate contexts

`TasksContext` to provide current list of tasks

`TaskDispatchContext` provides function that lets components dispatch actions.

2. put state and dispatch into context

3. use context anywhere

this way parent components doesn't pass any event handlers.

each component reads the relevant context

state still lives at the top-level component managed with `useReducer` but the state and dispatch are available to any component below in the tree by using context.

`TasksProvider` knows how to deal with tasks

`useTasks` reads them

`useDispatch` updates them.

pairing context-reducer is ideal to scale an app and lift state up without much complexity

