# intro to mongoDB

overview
- how mongoDB is classified and used
- data organization
- how mongoDb relates to atlas

general purpose document database

structures data into documents, similar to json objects

fundamentally different of how relational databases store data in rows and columns

simple document

```json
{
  "_id": 1,
  "name": {
    "first": "ada",
    "last": "lovelace"
  },
  "title": "the first programmer",
  "interests": ["mathematics", "programming"]
}
```

documents correspond to objects in code.

document model makes it easy to plan how application data will correspond to data in the database.

documents can model data of any shape or structure
- key value pairs
- text
- geospatial indexes
- time-series
- graph data

use one format to both model and query data

mongoDB provides drivers in all major programming languages to connect to a database using an application based in your preferred language.

features
- scalability
- resilience
- speed of development
- privacy and security

**document** basic unit of data in mongoDB

**collection** grouping of documents.

**database** container for collections.

relationship between mongoDB and atlas

The MongoDB database is the foundation of MongoDB Atlas. The additional functionality that Atlas offers—such as full-text search, data visualization, data lake storage, and mobile device sync—are built on top of data stored in cloud-hosted MongoDB database deployments.

MongoDB is a general-purpose database that can handle most types of workloads, including real-time analytics.

- What is the basic unit of data in MongoDB?

document

# document model

```json
{
"_id": 1,
"name": "AC3 Phone",
"colors" : ["black", "silver"],
"price" : 200,
"available" : true
}
```
values in the key-value pairs can be any data types
- strings
- objects
- arrays
- booleans
- nulls
- dates
- objectIds
- etc

## _id field

Every MongoDB document must include a _id field with a unique value, whether it's included in the inserted document or auto-generated by MongoDB.

The _id field is used as a unique identifier in MongoDB.

The _id field is automatically included and populated with an ObjectId if it's omitted in the inserted document.

MongoDB has a flexible schema model, which means that documents in the same collection are not required to share a common structure of fields and value types by default.

# managing database, collections and documents

data explorer built in tool to interact and manage data from atlas UI

data explorer can create and view databases, collections and documents

# lab managing databases, collections and documents in atlas data explorer

data explorer can create a new
- database
- collection
- document

# lab view databases and collection in atlas

# lab create a database and collection

the document size of a database is 0B when is empty

- connect mongoDB atlas cluster using atlas UI
- create a database `library` with a `books` collection.

# lab insert a document

- connect to mongodb cluster using atlas UI
- create a new `magazines` collection in `library` database
- insert document into `magazines` collection.
- two fields of different data types

# overview / conclusion

- overall mongoDB database
- document model
- atlas data explorer

general purpose document model database for wide variety of usecases.

data is organized in mongodb by
- database (container for collections)
- collection (grouping of documents)
- documents (basic unit)

documents are displayed in JSON but stored in BSON

BSON extension of JSON that support additional data types
- Dates
- Numbers
- ObjectIds

**ObjectId**

data type that creates unique identifiers for the `_id` field

mongoDB has a flexible schema that allows to modify structure of data

data model supports polymorphic data

documents within a collection can contain different fields and value types.

constrain structure of documents with optional schema validation.

mongoDB database is core of atlas

manage databases, collections and databases with atlas UI

every document requires `_id` which acts as a primary key or unique identifyer.

mongoDB auto generates a missing `_id` field

# additional reading

https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/core/document/?_ga=2.156771644.604663874.1677704641-1031816687.1677704641

https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/bson-types/?_ga=2.156771644.604663874.1677704641-1031816687.1677704641

https://www.mongodb.com/basics/bson?_ga=2.156771644.604663874.1677704641-1031816687.1677704641

https://www.mongodb.com/json-and-bson?_ga=2.156771644.604663874.1677704641-1031816687.1677704641

https://www.mongodb.com/docs/atlas/atlas-ui/databases/?_ga=2.156771644.604663874.1677704641-1031816687.1677704641

https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/core/databases-and-collections/?_ga=2.156771644.604663874.1677704641-1031816687.1677704641