# solidity and the EVM

**solidity**

high level language that compiles to bytecode and runs in the ethereum virtual machine

the more details of the machine are abstracted away from the developer, the more high level is considered to be

solidity is high-level, but more low-level than javascript as it hides less of the machine details.

every operation and data stored on the blockchain costs money.

bytecode is the lowest level code the machine executes. opcodes are stored in a byte in bytecode.

```
uint i = 0;
uint sum = 0;
while (i < 5) {
  sum += i;
}
```

bytecode for that contract

```
6080604052348015600f57600080fd5b5060a58061001e6000396000f3fe6080604052348015600f57600080fd5b506004361060285760003560e01c8063a92100cb14602d575b600080fd5b60336049565b6040518082815260200191505060405180910390f35b6000806000905060008090505b600582101560675781810190506056565b80925050509056fea264697066735822122058d7e11ff1d36fc53779562e305af3c9180b2ab8dccfe6d234fa50420908a5d864736f6c63430006030033
```

some are *opcodes* and some are *operands* (optional arguments) they both form an *instructions*

```
PUSH1 0x80 PUSH1 0x40 MSTORE CALLVALUE DUP1 ISZERO PUSH1 0xF JUMPI PUSH1 0x0 DUP1 REVERT JUMPDEST POP PUSH1 0xA5 DUP1 PUSH2 0x1E PUSH1 0x0 CODECOPY PUSH1 0x0 RETURN INVALID PUSH1 0x80 PUSH1 0x40 MSTORE CALLVALUE DUP1 ISZERO PUSH1 0xF JUMPI PUSH1 0x0 DUP1 REVERT JUMPDEST POP PUSH1 0x4 CALLDATASIZE LT PUSH1 0x28 JUMPI PUSH1 0x0 CALLDATALOAD PUSH1 0xE0 SHR DUP1 PUSH4 0xA92100CB EQ PUSH1 0x2D JUMPI JUMPDEST PUSH1 0x0 DUP1 REVERT JUMPDEST PUSH1 0x33 PUSH1 0x49 JUMP JUMPDEST PUSH1 0x40 MLOAD DUP1 DUP3 DUP2 MSTORE PUSH1 0x20 ADD SWAP2 POP POP PUSH1 0x40 MLOAD DUP1 SWAP2 SUB SWAP1 RETURN JUMPDEST PUSH1 0x0 DUP1 PUSH1 0x0 SWAP1 POP PUSH1 0x0 DUP1 SWAP1 POP JUMPDEST PUSH1 0x5 DUP3 LT ISZERO PUSH1 0x67 JUMPI DUP2 DUP2 ADD SWAP1 POP PUSH1 0x56 JUMP JUMPDEST DUP1 SWAP3 POP POP POP SWAP1 JUMP INVALID LOG2 PUSH5 0x6970667358 0x22 SLT KECCAK256 PC 0xD7 0xE1 0x1F CALL 0xD3 PUSH16 0xC53779562E305AF3C9180B2AB8DCCFE6 0xD2 CALLVALUE STATICCALL POP TIMESTAMP MULMOD ADDMOD 0xA5 0xD8 PUSH5 0x736F6C6343 STOP MOD SUB STOP CALLER
```

solidity compiler has an assembly output.

```
tag 7               while(i < 5) ...
  JUMPDEST          while(i < 5) ...
  PUSH 5            5
  DUP3              i
  LT                i < 5
  ISZERO            while(i < 5) ...
  PUSH [tag] 8      while(i < 5) ...
  JUMPI             while(i < 5) ...
  DUP2              i
  DUP2              sum += i
  ADD               sum += i
  SWAP1             sum += i
  POP               sum += i
  PUSH [tag] 7      while(i < 5) ...
  JUMP              while(i < 5) ...
tag 8               while(i < 5) ...
  JUMPDEST          while(i < 5) ...
  DUP1              sum
  SWAP3             return sum
  POP               return sum
```

left side there's a representation of the op codes

right side shows where in the solidity code the instruction is generated

*tags* are referred as *labels* used to mark locations in the code

at the lowest level, there are no loops in a computer

instead of loops, operations sometimes allow to change what lie of code to run next.

operations manipulate the program counter.

`JUMP` and `JUMPI` operations manipulate the programming counter.

tags are locations in code where you can jump to

`JUMP` and `JUMPI` are the operations that make EVM  turing complete

```
 PUSH 5            5
  DUP3              i
  LT                i < 5
  ISZERO            while(i < 5) ...
  PUSH [tag] 8      while(i < 5) ...
  JUMPI             while(i < 5) ...
```

the **value** 5 is being **pushed** onto the stack

the stack data structure is where most operations will load/store runtime data.

used to store local variables and run arithmetic

opcodes will use the values at the top of stack as operands.

a stack has a LIFO structure with lots of push and pop

the value for variable `i` is stored in the third byte position on the stack to be duplicated and compared to the value `5` using `LT` operator.

if value is less than `5` this evaluates to 1 otherwise 0.

`ISZERO` condition that `JUMPI` will use to jump to memory location `tag 8`

if result is 1 it jumps to `tag 8` and move towards the part that sums

if the comparison is `0` then the loop is ran

```
  DUP2              i
  DUP2              sum += i
  ADD               sum += i
  SWAP1             sum += i
  POP               sum += i
  PUSH [tag] 7      while(i < 5) ...
  JUMP              while(i < 5) ...
```

adds value stored in `i` to the `sum` value

unconditionally jumps back to `tag 7` and we run the `i` comparison again

https://github.com/crytic/ethersplay

# smart contracts

similarities of solidity with javascript

comments can be done with `//` or `/* */`

lowerCamelCase is used

`{ }` mark scopes

boolean values can be modified with a boolean operator `!`

`contract` acts like a javascript class.

`return` keyword is used to pass a value from a function

dissimilarities

pragma version control statement

`public/private` keywords

static types

`this` is not used to refer to members.

functions define what it should return

## compiler version control

```
pragma solidity ^0.6.2
```

contract will compile with version defined but anything above until the next minor version `0.7.0`

npm and the solidity compiler both use semantic versioning

`major` updates don't guarantee backwards compatibility

`minor` versions add functinality and are backwards compatible

`patch` are bug fixes

prior to the major `1.0.0` a system is considered unstable.

the constructor is run only once.

the constructor runs when the contract is deployed.

`isOn` variable is accessible anywhere in the contract by name.

`this` is still used in solidity to reference the **contract account**

state variables are referred by name, so constructor arguments to prevent shadowing are prepended with underscore

```
constructor(bool _isOn) public {
    // in this case we'll accept a boolean argument
    // that will set the initial value of isOn
    isOn = _isOn;
}
```

permanent storage on the blockchain is stored in patricia merkle tries on every ethereum node

local variables defined inside of a code block or passed as arguments live in memory only for the length of their particular scope.

## control structures

multiple values can be returned from a solidity function, like a `tuple`

solidity has along with `return`
- if
- else
- while
- do
- for
- break
- continue

**visibility specifiers** determine from where functions can be accessed.

public can be accessed anywhere.

a `getter` function is generated when declaring a variable `public` that allows access to the variable state

`internal` and `external` specifiers important to message passing and contract communication

javascript is a dynamically typed language, solidity is static.

variable types can't vary. they are fixed at declaration

booleans are false by default.

compile error if assigning the wrong data type to a variable

compile-time exception won't generate bytecode and wont be able to deploy the contract.

run-time exception could happen when a miner tries to validate a transaction

